## Repertoire of Support Functions

Whatever we can do to facilitate learning on the one hand and loving on the other is important, because those are the most healing forces available to us.

-Na'im Akbar

N o single form of support serves all purposes. Elements of Cognitive Coaching have been applied in many different forms of support models. Some models are technical, some are humanistic, and some are developmental or reflective. Since Joyce and Showers's (1980) initial work on 'coaching' to support the implementation of new initiatives, coaching models and practices have proliferated. Garmston (1987) described three models of peer coaching-not what you do but who you do it with-as technical, collegial, and challenge. Some terms used today are reading coach, literacy coach, instructional coach, math coach, data coach, and peer coach. Ed Pajak (2000) created a summary of models that distinguishes the unique features of many programs, but all of these approaches have certain tenets in common. Among them is the belief that teaching is 'untidy' and uncertain. Structured collegial conversations to help make meaning from complex instructional situations, and reflective conversations help to generate knowledge, expand teaching repertoire, and promote teacher development. Lipton and Wellman (2012, 5) add that:

Skillful teachers manage the social, emotional, and academic needs of increasingly diverse student populations. Total classroom awareness requires attention to these three dimensions while simultaneously tracking the lesson plan, content accuracy, use of examples, clarity of explanations and directions and choice of language to match student readiness. These teachers provide relevant and meaningful tasks, attend to momentum and pacing while purposefully monitoring student understanding, making adjustments as needed. And all of this is orchestrated for individual students, small groups and the full class.

This chapter considers a support provider's need for situational flexibility to achieve the mission of developing high-performing, selfdirected individuals. Specifically, we answer a variety of questions about the many different kinds of support provided to teachers. For example, when does one coach, and when does one consult? Can these functions ever be blended? Isn't everything evaluation? Can one person provide support and evaluate? If so, how can that be achieved?