## Isn't Everything Evaluation?

We're often asked, 'Isn't everything just evaluation?' This is a complex question to answer. First, it's useful to consider the various meanings of evaluate . Webster's Unabridged Dictionary (2014) provides this definition: to determine the worth of; to find the amount or value of; to appraise.

The word evaluate , used as a verb, is a nominalization. Nominalizations name ideas as events when they are actually processes. Nominalizations are abstractions, separate from the actual doing of the thing. Because abstractions trigger different representations in people's minds, it is useful to ask, 'What specifically does one do when one is evaluating?' First, one must be trained to judge the presence, absence, and levels of adequacy of targeted behaviors. The first problem we encounter with evaluation is that in study after study of observers judging teacher classroom performance, little agreement among different observers occurs (Ho and Kane 2014). To get high reliability, observers need to share a common philosophical orientation and leave biases at the classroom door (Gwet 2012).

When we claim Cognitive Coaching should be separated from evaluation, two issues often arise in people's minds. First, to evaluate is to make a judgment, but aren't humans judgment machines? Our very survival depends on rapid assessment of situations and determining the relative safety of our environment. Don't all actions and questions arise from the foundation of judgments we have made, either consciously or unconsciously?

We agree that judgment and action are inextricably intertwined. Yet one can choose to act without communicating judgment about events, behaviors, or choices that another has made if one is free of judgment about the individual. To repeat, when one is free from being judgmental about the individual, judgments about behaviors can be undisclosed. Studies reveal that judgments often depend on whether or not the observer feels in conflict with the person being observed (Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2008). Rebecca Saxe, who joined MIT's faculty in 2006 as an assistant professor of brain and cognitive sciences, specializes in social cognition-how people interpret other people's thoughts. To be

nonjudgmental of others is both a perspective and a discipline, developed as one gains in personal maturity. Harvard professor Robert Kegan (2000) identified this stage of adult meaning making as self-transforming mind. In this order of consciousness, which is infrequently reached and rarely reached before the age of 40, individuals see beyond themselves, others, and systems of which they are a part to form an understanding of how all people and systems interconnect. They recognize their interdependence with others. Relationships can be truly intimate in this order, with nurturance and affiliation as the key characteristics. Relationships become a part of one's world rather than the reason for one's existence. Kegan noted that only rarely do work environments provide these conditions and that long-lasting adult love relationships do not necessarily do so either.

Drago-Severson (2004) offers that more typically the level of development known as 'self-authoring thought' characterizes our most mature teachers. In this order, self-authorship is the focus. Individuals 'have the capacity to take extraordinary action at the individual or collective level, and yet more often we do not' (Kegan and Lahey 2001, 5). Of course, judgment is associated with coaching (and consulting and collaborating). However, the judgment required in these settings is about comparing behaviors against standards, results against goals, not about the worth or motivation of the individual. Webster's says that a judge is one who has skills or experience sufficient to decide on the merit, value, or quality of something. Judgments will always be a necessary part of our work. We can make judgments, however, without being judgmental. We can judge without criticizing, censuring, or praising.