## SOURCES OF EXCELLENCE

T his section addresses four major sources of teaching excellence: trust, five states of mind, research on instructional cognition, and the knowledge base of teaching. We define holonomy and describe the five states of mind that drive human resourcefulness. The chapter on teacher cognition includes recent research on complex thinking processes and findings from the neurosciences.

Excellence refers to qualities that are unusually good and exceed ordinary talents. First, trust is a foundation in which Cognitive Coaching thrives. Relational trust is defined by researchers Bryk and Schneider (2002) as fundamental, yet trust in self, in the coaching process, and in the environment are also needed for excellence to develop and flourish.

Five states of mind, the second feature addressed in this section, are drives that propel human performance. Coaches attend to these mental states of efficacy, flexibility, craftsmanship, consciousness, and interdependence to foster the development of self-directed persons who can sustain performance at the level of excellence, both individually and as members of a community. The third aspect, cognition, explores the research on teacher thinking. Since thinking drives teaching decisions and behaviors, the Cognitive Coach dedicates him/herself to the refinement and development of this resource for application in the classroom. This chapter illuminates why having teachers talk about their theories, assumptions, and decisions about teaching improves those same inner qualities. From this emanate refined decisions, more effective teaching, and improved student learning.

Finally, the fourth aspect of excellence relates to continually inquiring into the growing knowledge base of teaching. Although a teacher's knowledge of content is not the major contributor to student learning (Hattie 2012) it is an essential part of teaching excellence. Also critical are pedagogical knowledge, knowledge about student characteristics and

developmental stages, and knowledge of self in order to override approaches to teaching borne from personal history rather than informed connections between the students one is teaching and content-specific pedagogy. Finally, this section addresses the importance of continual learning in knowledge of the brain's role in learning and personal capacities for collegial interaction.