## Trust in Self

To do good things in the world, first you must know who you are and what gives meaning to your life.

-Paula Brownlee

The state of mind of consciousness includes being aware of one's actions and the effect they have on others. Self-trust depends on this awareness and is prerequisite to developing trusting relationships with others. The best coaches we've seen are conscious and clear about their identities as mediators and their own values and beliefs in areas such as pedagogy, philosophy, and human development. They manage their behaviors to be congruent with those core values. They experience a well-defined sense of personal identity that comes, in part, from their ability to articulate their beliefs with precision and passion. They function at a high stage of affective development, characterized by a strong sense of values. They maintain the belief that no matter what the situation, they will remain true to themselves. We would say that they have integrity.

Ultimately, these personal core values shape a coach's perceptions about leadership responsibilities, the meaning of learning, the potential for a school or community, and what motivates people. Trusting yourself also means being conscious of the ways in which you process and make meaning of experiences. For example, we relate easily to those with similar cognitive styles, but it requires greater effort to withhold value judgments about other people's attitudes and perceptions when their style differs from ours. Although we use all of our senses all the time, we often pay attention to one sense more than another. One of the capabilities of a skillful coach is being able to adjust one's own style preferences. This requires knowing your own representational system strengths and being conscious of how you understand your experiences through visual, kinesthetic, and auditory channels.

Gender, culture, race, religion, geographical region, childhood experiences, and family history are explored in chapter 10. These factors predispose us to draw certain inferences and to attend to certain stimuli while blocking out others. None of us leaves our emotions on the doorstep when we go to work. At times we function at less than our best for a variety of spiritual or emotional reasons. Flexible coaches know when they're being negatively influenced by their emotions, and they respect the fact that colleagues also experience emotional shifts that sap energy and

distract attention. Coaches who trust themselves are more capable of building trust with others.