## 'WALKING THE TALK'

Joe Saban, former superintendent of the Crystal Lake High School District in Illinois, describes how teachers learned the process of using portfolios with students by first keeping their own portfolios. Soon they decided that if portfolios were useful for teachers and students, then they would also be beneficial for school administrators. Thus, the building principals began keeping school portfolios. Soon the practice spread, and then Joe also kept portfolios to demonstrate his accomplishments to the board of education.

The effective coach also works to create, monitor, and maintain a stimulating, mediational, and cooperative environment deliberately designed to sustain and enhance trust. Wheatley (1992) theorizes that the movement toward participation in organizations is rooted, perhaps subconsciously, in our changing perceptions of the universe. Knowing how to network, how to draw on the diverse resources of others, and how to value each person's expertise, diverse views, perceptions, and

knowledge base is increasingly essential to survival. We might view this as a new form of interlocking intelligences: collaboratively melding perceptions, modalities, skills, capacities, and expertise into a unified whole that is more efficient than any one of its parts.

Cognitive Coaches, being aware of this, strive to behave consistently in regard to these core values and beliefs. Because life in school is often fragmented, idiosyncratic, fast paced, and unpredictable, coaches' longterm impacts on a school occur through the consistency with which they handle day-to-day interactions.

Researchers at Rutgers University studied teachers' perspectives on what makes principals trustworthy (Kupersmith and Hoy 1989). Three characteristics emerged. First, principals took responsibility for their own behaviors. They admitted mistakes and did not blame others. Second, principals acted as people rather than as 'roles.' Trusted principals revealed personal information about themselves-their likes and dislikes, their emotions, their history-so others had a sense of who they were away from the job. Third, trusted principals were nonmanipulative. They influenced directly, not covertly, and they had no hidden agendas. This research also found links between interpersonal trust and trust in the environment. Teachers who had faith in the principal often trusted each other and the central office personnel.

We sometimes hear the complaint 'But there is no trust here,' as if that settled the matter about being able to move forward on any venture. When you are told this, ask what kind of behaviors would people be seeing and hearing if trust were present. With a behavioral description of a desired state, one has targets to work toward rather than wallowing in despair. Acting on those behaviors is the first step in recovering trust.