## Holonomy: Paradox and Promise

Holonomy is a combination of two Greek words: holos meaning whole, and on meaning part. Holonomy conveys the notion that an entity is both an autonomous unit and a member of a larger whole simultaneously. Holonomy may be oxymoronic since it implies a combination of opposites -being both a part and a whole-acting autonomously and, at the same

time, working interdependently. Because all life forces are simultaneously independent and interdependent, self-assertive and integrative, whole unto themselves yet always a part of systems larger than themselves, holonomy, therefore is paradoxical.

Autonomous human beings are self-referencing, drawing on their own unique systems, experiences, strengths, and origins to continuously grow. This growth includes the capacity to transcend their own original patterns. In autonomous, assertive individuals, growth emanates from within, as do the life forces within a seed that produce growth into a tree.

There is, however, no such thing as a purely autonomous, independent entity. All organisms are at once autonomous and simultaneously in reciprocity with their environment and with other organisms. Even the most effective self-modifying, self-authoring, autonomous individual maintains membership in numerous larger environments and communities: family, a church group, a workplace, a department or staff, a community, or a nation.

The interaction of these two components of holonomy, which produces the paradoxical conflict, is about the human capacity and proclivity to work collaboratively in, and at the same time to learn from, collegial groups. A paradox implies polarity and conflict. It is this duality that gives rise to certain tensions between these opposing internal drives and external forces. Humans strive for self-identity and assertion and simultaneously strive for reciprocity and affiliation with others. The source of human tensions stems from equilibration-the search for balance between such dichotomies as:

- Ambiguity and certainty . Humans have a passion for certainty and a simultaneous need for doubt. Our minds tend to distort meanings to fit our own biases, assumptions, and theories. We are self-convincing and believe there is truth in what we know. We are, however, in a constant state of tentativeness, open to the reality that our information may be inadequate, that additional information may dispute our conclusions, that we have not analyzed or defined our conflict thoroughly. Numerous examples can be found in scientific progress as more recent and conclusive evidence disputes obsolescent theories. (The heliocentric universe, global warming, and the definition of photosynthetic life are but a few examples.)
- Knowledge and action . Human beings strive for congruence between what we know and believe and how we behave. While we may possess an abundance of knowledge about a subject, we do not

- always apply that knowledge to our actions. An example might be from education; we know that most boys mature later than girls do, yet we teach a uniform curriculum simultaneously to both.
- Egocentric and allocentric perspectives . Humans continually work to ameliorate our own perspectives with others' perspectives. We perceive situations or events from our own point of view but may find we are at odds with the point of view held by others. Any married couple can cite numerous examples of contrasting male and female perspectives; resolving learning/thinking style differences stretches us to consider alternative points of view.
- Self-assertion and integration . Humans strive to become autonomous, self-initiating, unique individuals and, at the same time, hold membership and allegiance to the larger community. In meetings, for example, we may ask ourselves, 'Is this the time when I need to assert my ideas or should I choose to go along with the will of the group even though the group's decision may be contrary to my own views?'
- Transparency between inner and outer lives . What one thinks and feels inside is presented on the outside in behavior. Humans have the capacity to mask emotions. Young children derive great delight from pretending. As we mature, we experience feelings, thoughts, and opinions but choose not to expose them to others. Examples might be when someone tells an offensive joke-we may smile overtly but we feel hurt or put off inside; or while we may be experiencing rage inside, we wish to convey to others the appearance of calmness and rationality.
- Solitude and interconnectedness . At times, humans desire to be alone and introspective and yet are driven by the basic need to be interactive and reciprocal with others. We wish to be alone but are exhilarated by the interpersonal interaction with crowds. There are times when we wish to retreat to our cave and other times when we wish to visit the commons. Those who are adept at presenting to large groups may draw energy from their audience but then find solace in being alone. Most humans dread the thought of being deserted or abandoned, yet we often search for seclusion.

Effectively balancing and resolving tensions and conflicts such as these demand that we draw upon certain internal resources. These internal capacities may be described in terms of five states of mind. Taken together, they are forces that human beings access as they strive for

increasingly authentic, congruent, ethical behavior. They are the tools of disciplined choices that guide human actions in resolving the tensions listed above. They are the primary vehicles in the lifelong journey toward integration.

Living holonomously requires a person to continually engage in the process of growing toward wholeness while seeking balance with individuality. A holonomous person is one who becomes increasingly aware of this internal conflict and knows how to manage it with flexibility -being alert to both environmental and internal cues that inform his or her knowing when and how to act autonomously, as well as when and how to act interdependently (Huppke 2014). Table 7.1 describes these tensions.

As stated in chapter 1, the mission of Cognitive Coaching is to produce self-directed persons with the cognitive capacity for excellence, both independently and as members of a community. One purpose of Cognitive Coaching, therefore, is to develop each individual's capability to accept that he or she is simultaneously a whole and a part (whole in terms of self and yet subordinate to a larger system) and then work to realize that capability. Effective teachers, for example, are autonomous individuals: self-asserting, self-motivating, and self-modifying. However, they are also parts of larger wholes: a department, a school, a district. They are influenced by the norms, attitudes, values, and behaviors of the collective. The school, in turn, is an autonomous unit interacting within the influence of the district and the community. Holonomy is both a goal and an ideal: a vision toward which humans and organizations forever strive.

Table 7.1. Tensions and Drives

By resolving these dichotomies, we can develop intellectual, moral, and

ego resourcefulness. Russian psycholinguist Lev Vygotsky (1978) suggests that intelligence grows in two ways: through our own experiences and through our interactions with others. Our intelligence actually increases as we justify reasons, resolve differences, listen to another person's point of view, achieve consensus, and receive feedback.

With repeated opportunities to resolve these conflicts, and with purposeful reflection, we develop resourcefulness in coping with future conflicts and tensions. We experience a sense of interconnectedness, unity, and bonding to common goals and shared values. We enlarge their conception from 'me' to 'us.' And we understand that as we transcend the self and become part of the whole, we do not lose our individuality but rather our egocentricity.

To effectively balance and resolve these challenges, we must develop and draw upon certain internal resources. We describe these internal drives as five states of mind.