## Consciousness as an Innate Drive

The neurobiology of consciousness is organized around what Damasio (2010) calls the triad of wakefulness, mind, and self. The brain stem, the

thalamus, and the cerebral cortex are the major players. Although consciousness may not be unique to Homo sapiens , cognitive ethnologists claim that some animals also have intentions, beliefs, and self-awareness and that they consciously think about alternative courses of action and make plans (Shettleworth 1998). The great advantage that humans have over animals, however, is that we can strengthen and direct our capacity for consciousness because of the neural anatomy of our brain, which permits development of an autobiographical self. Human consciousness exceeds that of other life forms in that the human conscious mind encompasses actual and imaginary contents effortlessly, thus allowing planning and reflection. One way of describing human consciousness is that we are aware that certain events are occurring, and we are able to direct their course (metacognition). As humans, we can direct or control whatever we are conscious of within ourselves.

The function of consciousness in humans is to represent information about what is happening outside and inside the body in such a way that it can be evaluated and acted upon by the body. To be conscious is to be aware of one's thoughts, feelings, viewpoints, and behaviors and the effect they have on oneself, on others, and on the environment. A unique function of human consciousness is to reflect on what is past, imagine what could be, and plan for its achievement.

Over centuries of evolution, the human nervous system has become so complex that it is able to affect its own states. We can make ourselves sad or happy, regardless of what is happening outside. Yet the human nervous system is still limited to managing very limited bits of information at any one time, such as differentiated sounds, visual stimuli, or nuances of emotion or thought (Rock 2009). If conscious capacity is limited, however, how do teachers, parents, coaches, or students focus their consciousness to serve them in their goals?

Damasio (2010) suggests that consciousness begins when brains acquire the power of telling a story without words, the story that life is ticking away in an organism, and the states of the living organism, within body bounds, are continuously being altered by encounters with objects or events in its environment, or, for that matter, by thoughts and by internal adjustments of the life process. Consciousness begins when this primordial story-the story of an object causally changing the state of the body-can be told using the universal nonverbal vocabulary of body signals. The apparent self emerges as the feeling

of a feeling. (30-31)