## Cognitive Coaching Mediates Consciousness

Coaches strive to help colleagues bring to awareness how they feel about a situation. Met in awareness, these feelings sometimes evoke gut reactions that open or close some options to deliberations. Once these feelings are brought to consciousness, colleagues are in a better position to apply their intuitions within the more cognitive processes of decision making. Feelings are translated through images-held in the brain as pictures, smells, feelings, or sounds related to the body's perceptual systems-and as abstract patterns as well. When feelings are brought to the surface, they can also be examined or challenged to determine if they are interpretations of the real event being worked with or a memory of another event that therefore eliminates viable options from subsequent consideration.

Coaches often shine a spotlight on data previously not noticed by the teacher. Three stimuli bring data to consciousness: a discrepant event, a flashlight shined by another person, or intention. Imagine you are in traffic, hardly noticing the shapes or occupants of the cars around you, when a car with flashing lights (a discrepant event) suddenly breaks into your consciousness. Or imagine that a friend, serving as a spotlight, asks a question that causes you to examine a feeling or theory or action of yours. Finally, notice that whenever you are clear about your intentions, your attention is riveted in that direction.

People engaging in an enriched state of consciousness often think about their own thinking and feeling. They monitor their values, thoughts, behaviors, and progress toward goals. They articulate well-defined value systems, and they generate and apply internal criteria for decisions. They practice mental rehearsal and edit mental pictures as they seek to improve performance.