## RESEARCH ON TEACHERS' THINKING

Teacher cognition research is concerned with understanding what teachers think, know, and believe as they engage in the acts of planning and implementing instruction, and reflecting on their teaching. Its primary concern, therefore, lies with the unobservable qualities of teachingteachers' mental processes. During the mid-1970s, great advances were made in understanding the ways that cognitive systems perform in learning (Borg 2006). According to Borg (2009), however, little research has focused on teachers' cognitive processes since then. Thus, many of the references cited in this chapter date from that era.

In the 1960s, research on teaching focused on the search for effective teaching behaviors as correlated with student achievement tests scores. The purpose was to identify certain effective behaviors in the belief that teachers could then apply them universally. In the 1970s, however, this view of teaching became questionable. Cognitive psychologists found complex relationships between what teachers do and what they know, feel, and believe. We became more aware of the fact that teachers' cognition

influenced their instructional decisions. Teachers were not pawns that simply implemented curricula designed by others in an unthinking manner. Rather, teachers exerted agency in their work (Bandura 1982). They made decisions, both before and while teaching a lesson. They reflected upon and modified their decisions (Schon 1983). Such cognitive processes became a new focus for educational researchers. The questions they asked were not simply 'What do teachers do,' but also 'What do teachers think?' 'What decisions do they make?' and 'What prompted those decisions?' The notion of universally applicable teaching behaviors was viewed with increasing skepticism as the uniqueness of classroom and school cultures, the uniqueness of teachers and of learners became acknowledged (Borg 2009; Costa, Garmston, and Zimmerman 2014).

Teachers who possess cognitive systems with highly developed levels of perception, abstraction, complexity, and decision making consistently have students who perform well on both lower and higher cognitive tasks (Clark and Peterson 1986). In this chapter, we describe the act of teaching as a highly intellectual process that involves continual decision making before, during, and after instruction. We also examine how linguistic, nonlinguistic, and affective systems affect cognition and teacher thinking, including the implications for Cognitive Coaching.