## major findings.

- 1. All behavior is based on rather simple cognitive maps of reality . Teachers make decisions based on these maps. Swedish researchers Dahllof and Lundgren (1970) discovered that teachers used a subset of the class, ranging from the 10th to the 25th percentile, as an informal reference group for decisions about pacing a lesson or unit. These mental constructs guided the teacher's behavior toward the entire class.
- 2. Invisible cognitive skills and unconscious reflexive reactions also inform teaching performance . These skills and emotions influence the behavior of teachers and students, student achievement, and, reciprocally, teachers' thought processes.
- 3. Talking aloud about their thinking and their decisions about teaching causes teachers to refine their cognitive maps, perceptions, and cognitive skills . Since existing maps hold implicit theories about teaching and learning, refining these causes changes in theories and in instructionsl behaviors. All cognitive maps are incomplete and teachers' maps are sufficiently pragmatic to have gotten them where they are (Clark and Peterson 1986). Talking aloud about teaching decisions not only causes examination, refinement, and development of new theories and practices, but also engages teachers emotionally. Many report stasifaction and gratitude for the conversations.
- 4. Invisible cognitive skills of teaching can be categorized in four domains. Preactive thought occurs as the teacher plans before teaching. Interactive thought occurs during teaching. Reflective thought occurs when teachers recall and analyze a lesson. Projective thought is used to synthesize and apply learnings and plan next steps.
- 5. 'Thinking' is influenced at the intersection of three ways of knowing . These ways of knowing are linguistic, nonlinguistic, and affective (Marzano 1998; Berry et al. 2003). All information that is perceived by the senses passes through these three processors and is encoded in linguistic representations, sensory images, or affective representations. For example, while teachers' thought processes are influenced by deeply held theories of learning, beliefs about their own efficacy, perceptions of the system in which they work, and beliefs about education or student conduct they are represented thrice.
- In the linguistic mode, these are stored as propositions in the form of abstract concepts (e.g., 'A quiet student is a good student.'). To describe the concept, the teacher must use token words to express herself.

- The same concept is also stored in permanent memory in a nonlinguistic mode: in images, sounds, smells, or kinesthetic sensations.
- Such propositions about students are also stored in an affective mode. Affect includes the unconscious mind-feelings, emotions, and mood. Feelings are purely physiological, the result of chemical reactions in the body. Rational thinking is impossible without the involvement of feelings and emotions . Emotion occurs in relationship to what our thoughts have to say about the feelings.

Coaching, then, must take into account and utilize these ways of knowing. Because Cognitive Coaching uses processes that attend to a teacher's language, sensory memories, and feelings, it can raise these deep-structure forms of knowing to a more conscious level so that the teacher can elaborate, clarify, evaluate, and alter them. Ornstein (1991) reminds us, 'To make a personal change, we have to be able to observe the automatic workings inside ourselves.'

An unexpected by-product occurs when teachers talk about their reasons for doing things and respond to questions about their perceptions and teaching decisions. They often experience a sense of professional excitement, and they also speak of renewed joy and energy related to their work (Edwards and Newton 1995).