## Teachers' Mental Processes

Mental processes are primarily procedural, and they are normally held in linguistic and nonlinguistic modes. Some mental processes of teaching have a wide diversity of uses and products, and they involve the execution of many interrelated subprocesses. For example, teaching a concept attainment lesson to students requires getting students' attention, focusing attention on a conceptual challenge, giving clear directions, classifying student responses as either positive or negative, and performing within acceptable boundaries of teacher responses related to the outcome of the lesson. Other mental processes of teaching are less complex and are made up of a general set of principles that can be applied in several settings. In getting student attention, for example, the teacher can position himself in the room, assume a still and grounded body posture, call for attention in a credible voice, and hold his body and gesture still until complete attention is achieved.

Experienced teachers will have additional models and mental processes for focusing student attention. Some simple mental processes have narrow uses and are learned to the point of automaticity, such as distributing materials for student work and are, therefore, performed with less effort. Cognitive skills of teaching and learning become automatic with continued practice. The more automatic some mental processes become, the more 'cognitive space' is available for complex decision making during the lesson (Hattie 2003). Coaching helps teachers streamline existing mental models and form new ones.