## Planning-The Preactive Phase

Planning may well include the most important decisions teachers make because it is the phase upon which all other decisions rest. Planning basically involves four components (Shavelson 1976):

- 1.  Anticipating, predicting, and developing precise descriptions of students' learnings that are to result from instruction. Ironically, this can be a low priority for many teachers (Zahorick 1975).
- 2.  Identifying students' present capabilities or entry knowledge. This information is drawn from previous teaching and learning experience, data from school records, test scores, and clues from previous teachers, parents, and counselors (Shavelson 1977).
- 3.  Envisioning precisely the characteristics of an instructional sequence or strategy that will most likely move students from their present capabilities toward immediate and long-range instructional outcomes. This sequence is derived from whatever theories, beliefs, or models of teaching logic, learning, or motivation that the teacher has adopted. The sequential structure of a lesson is deeply embedded in teachers' plans for allocating their most precious and limited resource-time. When a person thinks about an action, the brain sends electrical impulses to the nerves and muscles in the corresponding locations of the mind and body associated with the action. This is called the 'carpenter effect' (Ulich 1967), and it is the scientific basis for the practice of mental rehearsal. (See the sidebar 'More about Mental Rehearsal.') Mental rehearsal is also beneficial for overcoming the psychological and emotional problems associated with performance (Whetten and Cameron 2010 ). .
- 4.  Anticipating a method of assessing outcomes. The outcomes of this assessment provide a basis for evaluating and making decisions about the design of the next cycle of instruction.

There is reasonable agreement among researchers that teachers do not adapt a linear form of planning (e.g., specifying objectives first, then

selecting learning activities). Instead, teachers seem to enter the planning process from multiple and various entry points. In fact, several studies find that many teachers think first about content, materials, resources, students' interests, and abilities. Aims and purposes are considered last (Zahorick 1975).

In their study comparing expert and novice teachers, Borko and Livingston (1989) found that, although none of the expert teachers had written lesson plans, all could easily describe mental plans for their lessons. These mental plans typically included a general sequence of lesson components and content, although they did not include details such as timing or pacing the exact number of examples and problems. These aspects of instruction were determined during the class session on the basis of student questions and responses. When asked what would be happening in class each day, the experts described plans that explicitly anticipated contingencies that were dependent on student performance. They were skillful in keeping the lesson on track and accomplishing their objectives, while also allowing students' questions and comments as springboards for discussions.

Even underneath this structure, what is going on in teachers' minds as they plan? Psychologists know that the human intellect has a limited capacity for handling variables. Miller (1963) describes this as 'M-space,' or 'memory space.' He found that humans have a capacity for handling and coordinating seven different variables, decisions, or disparate pieces of information (plus or minus two) at any one time. This assumes that the person has attained Piaget's stage of formal operations, which not all adults achieve. Other researchers have concluded that most adults can operate on about four disparate variables simultaneously (Rock 2009).

When humans approach the outer limits of their capacity, a state of stress begins to set in and they feel a loss of control. Most intellectual energy appears to be invested in techniques and systems to simplify, reduce, and select the number of variables. For teachers, certain planning strategies help to reduce this stress.

During planning, a teacher envisions cues, or definitions of acceptable forms of student performance for learning. This simplifies judgments about appropriate and inappropriate student behaviors. The teacher also selects potential solutions, backup procedures, and alternative strategies for times when the activity has to be redirected, changed, or terminated. This kind of planning causes thought experiments during which a teacher can mentally rehearse activities to anticipate possible events and consequences. This improves the coordination and efficiency of

subsequent performance because systematic mental rehearsal prepares the mind and body for the activity. Rehearsal also is the main mechanism for focusing attention on critical factors relevant to the task.