## MORE ABOUT MENTAL REHEARSAL

Much of the literature and research on mental rehearsal is drawn from the field of athletics. Olympic pentathlete Marilyn King reports using a combination of three kinds of visualization: visual imagery (being able to project a visual image of herself), kinetic imagery (feeling or physically sensing), and auditory imagery. These three forms of visualization are used in three different areas: long-term goal orientation, envisioning a goal step by step, and centering (or concentrating) to eliminate outside distractions and focus inward. The famous French alpine skier Jean-Claude Killy mentally rehearsed ski slopes with a stopwatch. He concentrated on every turn of the slope, timing himself as he envisioned every inch of his performance from start to finish. Killy claimed that the recorded time for his mental performance closely paralleled the time he actually achieved in the competition that followed. With mental rehearsal, a pre-performance routine often is created. This routine may consist of a smorgasbord of psychological skills that the athlete feels most comfortable using. The skills are put together in a set order and used routinely before each and every performance.

For example, while on the diving platform, Olympic gold medalist Greg Louganis mentally rehearsed each dive using a self-talk, pre-performance routine, which served as an attentional cue or trigger right before his forward three-and-a-half somersault dive. He used the following cue words: 'Relax, see the platform, spot the water, spot the water, spot the water, kick out, spot the water again.' Note that he is doing this before the dive and not during the dive. The activity prepared his mind for the coming dive and his body for the series of movements. Rehearsal also enabled him to forget everything else in his surroundings.

One common problem as we work is failing to maintain effective concentration. Through mental rehearsal, we learn to direct attention to cues that are most important for performance, and at the same time to close down the perceptions of distracting external stimuli (Jansson 1983). Much research concerns performance during short physical activities, but we also know that mental rehearsal of complex, interactive activities of longer duration also improves performance. This means that it is helpful to rehearse whole races, entire games, and, of course, entire lesson sequences (Landers, Maxwell, Butler, and Fagen 2001).

Mental rehearsals of conversations have been found to improve performance. (See 'Inner Coaching' in chapter 11.) Williams (2012) reports an example in which a manager mentally rehearsed possible exchanges for a performance review with an employee. She visualized the employee raising objections about his performance review, saw herself paraphrasing his concerns and tactfully explaining that she had a different perception of his performance. She imagined that her efforts to listen to

her employee, even though she couldn't always agree with him, helped to keep him from becoming argumentative and baiting her into a quarrel. Finally, she imagined herself standing up, smiling, and very professionally shaking the employee's hand as their meeting came to a close. Her meeting, in fact, went just like that.

Planning also demands that the teacher exercise perceptual flexibility by engaging multiple perspectives, multiple and simultaneous outcomes, and multiple pathways. However, viewing learning from multiple perspectives requires a certain degree of disassociation from the instruction in order to assume alternative perspectives. Highly flexible teachers have the capacity to view a lesson in both the immediate and the long range. Not only are they analytical about the details of this lesson (the micro mode), but they can also see connections between this lesson and other related learnings. They know where this lesson is leading and how it is connected to broader curriculum goals (the macro mode). Less flexible, episodic teachers may view today's activity as a separate and discrete episode, unrelated to other learning events.

Accomplished teachers teach toward multiple outcomes simultaneously. They have immediate goals for this lesson, but they also know that this lesson leads to a long-term, more pervasive outcome as well. They keep in mind the school's or district's standards of learning. For example, teachers may wish to have students understand the causes of World War II. Simultaneously, they want students to learn interdependence by working in groups, to experience long-range planning for their group project, and to practice the habits of mind of persisting, striving for accuracy, and developing a questioning attitude (Costa and Garmston 1998).

Experienced, effective, flexible teachers draw on multiple strategies to achieve their lesson goals. Based on their knowledge of the content to be taught, the learners in their charge, and the available resources, they can design multiple alternative instructional strategies for achieving their goals. (This becomes even more apparent during teaching. the interactive phase, described below.)

Planning a teaching strategy also requires the cognitive function of analysis, both structural and operational. Structural analysis is the process of breaking down the learning of the content into its component parts. Operational analysis involves putting a series of events into a logical, sequential order. To handle this information overload, teachers often synthesize much of this information into hypotheses, or best guesses about student readiness for learning. They estimate the probability of successful student behavior as a result of instruction.

Although many studies report on teacher practices regarding planning, Clark and Peterson (1986) point out that research is silent on what planning processes are most effective. From our experience, we agree with Shavelson (1976) that of the four stages of teachers' thought, planning is the most important because it sets the standard for the remaining three phases. We also place particular emphasis on the value of specifying clear learning objectives. We find that the more clearly the teacher envisions and mentally rehearses the plan, the greater the chances that the lesson will achieve its purposes. Chances are also greater that the teacher will selfmonitor during the lesson and will more critically analyze the lesson during the reflective phase, thus assuming a greater internal locus of control.

Hattie (2003) reports that the number of requests for information made by expert and experienced teachers during the time they were planning instruction was about the same, but experts needed to know about the ability, experience, and background of the students they were to teach, and they needed to know about the facility in which they would be teaching.

Expert teachers anticipate and prevent disturbances from occurring whereas non-experts tend to correct already existing disturbances. This is because expert teachers have a wider scope of anticipation and more selective information gathering (Hattie 2003). Because of their responsiveness to students, experts can detect when students lose interest and do not understand.

Expert teachers are more likely to set challenging rather than 'do your best' goals. They set challenging and not merely time consuming activities; they invite students to engage rather than copy; and they aim to encourage students to share commitment to these challenging goals. Eighty percent of most class time is spent with teachers talking and students listening, whereas expert teachers have students engage in challenging tasks to a greater extent of the time (Hattie 2003, 9).