## CONCLUSION

In this chapter we have elaborated our beliefs that the craft of teaching is cognitively complex. All the behaviors we see in the classroom are artifacts of these internal mental processes. The myriad decisions are driven by even more deeply embedded conscious or subconscious beliefs, styles, metaphors, perceptions, and habits.

The research on teacher cognition presented here supports our attempt to refocus the definition of teaching away from an archaic, behavioristic model to a more modern and viable cognitive model and thus direct the coach's focus away from overt behaviors of teaching to concentrate on influencing those invisible, inner thought processes of teaching.

These cognitive processes were presented in four clusters of thought: planning, the preactive phase; teaching, the interactive phase; analyzing, the reflective phase; and applying, the projective phase. Based on this conception of teaching, the model of Cognitive Coaching, described in chapter 11, directly parallels and is intended to enhance teachers' growth toward even more thoughtful teaching. If teachers do not possess these mental capacities, no amount of experience alone will create it. It is through mediated processing and reflecting upon experience that these capacities will be developed (Feuerstein and Feuerstein 1991). As Cognitive Coaches, therefore, we are interested in operating on the inner thought processes-in 'coaching cognition.' Teachers possess wide and expanding bodies of information and skills, and they make decisions about

when to use what from the extensive range of their repertoire. Cognitive Coaching assists teachers in becoming more conscious, efficacious, precise, flexible, informed, and skillful decision makers. Together, teachers and coaches create greater student learning.

The ultimate purpose, however, is not only to enhance teaching and the resulting student learning but also to capacitate the teacher for self-directed learning and to cause the teacher to grow toward higher states of mind. In addition, our intent is to support the development of holonomous school cultures that, because they value and have skills in the dual goals of autonomy and interdependence, promote the professional development of teachers, reinvent instruction as appropriate, and increase student learning. Such is the vision of agile organizations. Thus the coach continually focuses on these long-range goals in the use of Cognitive Coaching skills.