## 5. How Might I Stretch to Higher Levels of Cognitive Complexity? (Knowledge of Cognitive Processes of Instruction)

Teachers' developmental levels have a direct correlation to their performance in the classroom. Teachers who function at higher conceptual levels are capable of greater degrees of complexity in the classroom and are more effective with students. Teachers with more advanced conceptual levels are more flexible, tolerant of stress, and adaptive in their teaching styles. Thus, they are able to assume multiple perspectives.

Conceptually advanced teachers are responsive to a wider range of learning styles and culturally diverse classes. Teachers at higher levels of conceptual development employ multiple perspectives, including the students' perspectives (Kegan 1994). They also apply the learners' frames of reference within their own frame of reference for instructional planning, teaching, and evaluation. Furthermore, expert teachers not only seem to perform better than novices do, they also seem to do so with less effort. Numerous researchers (Shulman 1987; Berliner 1994; Sternberg and Horvath 1995; Tsui 2003; Marzano 2007; Hattie 2012; Danielson 2013) outline ways that expert teachers differ from nonexpert teachers in knowledge, efficiency, and insight.

Though teachers' cognitive skills differ from one another on entering the profession, all teachers can develop greater cognitive capacity in the four phases of instructional thought described in chapter 8. One major intention of Cognitive Coaching is to develop these invisible skills of teaching through reflection that utilizes and extends the domains of craft knowledge described so far.