## TEACHERS AS CONTINUING LEARNERS

The pursuit of perfection in a craft is as old as the human species. Bill Powell, formerly superintendent of the International School of Kuala Lumpur, reminds us that our myths are replete with stories that praise the skill and wisdom of master craftsmen. Whether in art, music, sports, or business, the master craftsman in his or her pursuit of refinement and improvement continues to be featured among our most popular heroes. Powell suggests that craftsmanship is both an attribute and an energy source. The constant striving for improvement is certainly a quality of the master teacher, but it is more than a static characteristic. It is also a dynamic motivating force that compels the teacher toward greater refinement, greater specificity, and greater precision (Powell 2000).

The master teacher has always constructed clear visions and specific goals. In the mid-1980s, education began an unprecedented journey toward setting standards for students, teachers, and administrators. In schools that already had a norm of self-assessment, this provided new resources with which teachers could inform their goals for teaching.

Several characteristics can usually be found in these standards for teaching. First, standards reflect a holistic conception of career development, describing teacher competencies in ways that ensure consistency with emerging visions of teaching development. Second, the core standards describe essential efforts in teaching, regardless of the grade level or students being taught. Third, the standards are performance based, describing what teachers should know or be able to do. Finally, the standards are linked directly to current views of what students should know and be able to do to learn challenging subject matter.

Because teaching standards most generally describe generic teaching competencies unrelated to subject matter and age of student-and because our knowledge of teaching, learning, and content continues to evolvesuch standards are useful mainly as instruments for coaching and selfappraisal. As instruments of evaluation, they fall far short of reflecting the complexity of decision making in which teachers engage as they integrate and apply information from multiple domains of knowledge (Popham 2014, 47-52).