## ENGAGING IN COACHING

I n part 3, we examine four maps of Cognitive Coaching: planning, reflecting, problem resolving, and calibrating. This will be the first time the calibrating map appears in print. Coaches use these coaching maps to guide conversations, recognizing that planned conversations are significantly more effective than those without prethought structure. The coach considers all that has gone before in this book that is congruent with findings about human cognition and learning.

We also examine human diversity as it relates to coaching. Humans differ in many ways, and the accomplished coach is sensitive to these differences as she/he interacts with others. In this section, we describe seven of these distinctions: (1) representational systems, (2) cognitive styles, (3) educational belief systems, (4) gender, (5) race, ethnicity, nationality, and culture, (6) adult stages of development, and (7) generational differences. Generalizations must inform this reporting because endless variations in some of these categories-race, ethnicity, nationality, and culture, for example-are so numerous as to defy description in so short a treatment.

Perception is reality, and accomplished coaches make efforts to understand the world their coachees see in order to increase their coaching effectiveness. They adapt their communications to persons with whom they work, drawing upon their own state of mind of flexibility to do this. Language choices often offer cues as to the ways the coachee is processing information and the alert coach is sensitive to these nuances.

Coaches use the four Cognitive Coaching maps as guides to conversations, recognizing that planned conversations are significantly more effective than those without deliberate structure. Within each of the functions, the maps support the coach and teacher in meaningful conversation. The structure and coaching processes used with each map align with what the research community is discovering in brain science. As

one example, Boyastzis and Jack (2010) used fMRI to illuminate reactions in the brain. When self-directed models of coaching were used, the researchers observed positive emotions and openness to coaching. Neurotransmitters increased the accuracy of perceptions and cognitive functioning. More-critical coaching processes showed evidence of the opposite: defensiveness and decreased capacity for visioning and problem solving. Additionally, they found that thirty-minute conversations that focused on a person's goals activated, for as long as five to seven days, the parts of the brain associated with cognitive, perceptual, and emotional openness and better functioning.

Each of the four maps-whether devoted to planning, reflecting, calibrating performance against a standard, or resolving problemsremains dedicated to fostering self-directed learning.