## UNDERSTANDING PERCEPTION

Although we tend to believe what we perceive, our perceptions are not trustworthy. Perception is the interpretation of sensory information. The same tableau, seen through other eyes, reveals different findings. Perception is more than the passive receipt of information we receive

through our senses. Instead, the meanings of signals from the nervous system are shaped by memory, expectation, learning, and attention.

Perception, in large part, is the result of culture, genetics, and neurology. East Asians view the world differently than do Westerners, each group moving their eyes in patterns different from the other when looking at pictures (Azar 2010). Chinese see context while Americans see details. Neurological differences account for differences in perception between men and women. Women, according to studies, distinguish colors better than men, and men detect movement better than women. Abramov, Gordon, Feldman, and Chavarga (2012) explain that these elements of vision are linked to specific sets of thalamic neurons in the brain's primary visual cortex. They further note that there are also marked gender differences in hearing and the olfactory system.

A surprising number of animals see in color, but the colors they see are often different from the ones we see. Prairie dogs are colorblind to red and green; ants can't see red. Deer and rabbits see humans in shades of gray and by smelling. This is why human processing is often discussed in terms of 'representational systems'-that is, what we hear is a representation in our mind of the original sound, and what we see is a representation of a picture. The reality is created deep inside our brain (O'Connor and Seymour 1990). In short, what each species perceives, including human groups and individual humans, does not exist 'out there' but rather is constructed in ways unique to the physiology of each.

Neuroscientist Antonio Damasio explains that 'Representations are constructed based on the momentary selection of neurons and circuits engaged by the interaction. In other words the building blocks exist in the brain, available to be picked up and assembled' (1999). The part that remains in memory is built according to the same principles. So, when we think, we reexperience (reconstruct) the information in the sensory form in which we first experienced it: pictures, sounds, feelings, tastes, or smells. 'Images,' says Damasio, 'are the main currency of our minds' (2010, 160). Damasio uses the term images to include sights, sounds, feelings, and smells.

For Cognitive Coaches, understanding that each person creates perceptions unique to that person allows them to accept others' points of view as simply different, not wrong. They come to understand that they should be curious, not judgmental, about other peoples' impressions and understandings. The more we all understand how someone else processes information, the better we can communicate with him or her.