## REPRESENTATIONAL SYSTEMS

In Western culture, the primary nonlinguistic systems in which we think are the visual, auditory, and kinesthetic. All persons think using these three primary representational systems, and each of us favors one or two, even though we are often unaware of our thoughts in more than one system. In addition to having a highly preferred representational system, each person has a lead system. Reviews of a number of studies and conversations with observers in this field lead us to believe that roughly 40 percent of the U.S. population uses the visual system as the preferred mode. Another 40 percent is primarily kinesthetic, and 20 percent is auditory. Figure 10.1 shows these systems.

Stop right now and think back to your last good meal. If you first saw pictures, this is your lead system. If you are right handed, your eyes probably went up to the left accessing an image. Whatever you accessed first-pictures, sounds, or feelings-this is your lead system, the jumpstart to your thinking process, and it is likely that your eyes signaled this to an attentive other, eyes down for feelings, eyes aimed at ears for sounds. Perhaps you saw a picture of a friend's face, followed by feelings of relaxation. In that case, your lead system would be visual and your preferred system kinesthetic. As shown in figure 10.1,

Figure 10.1. Representational Systems

<!-- image -->

- Each person has a preferred system . We use this system more than the others, we make finer distinctions in this system, and we rely heavily on this system under stress. By age 11 or 12, we have made these preferences our dominant processing patterns.

- Each person also has a lead system . This is the starting system for thinking, a 'handle' to bring information to the conscious mind. Some people have different lead systems for different types of experiences-for example, pictures to retrieve pleasant experiences, and sounds to retrieve unpleasant ones.
- Each person also has an input system . This is a primary way to take in data. This may not be the same as one's preferred system. Synesthesia is an immediate and unconscious link across the senses.

The person with the most flexibility has the greatest influence in any interaction, because having greater flexibility opens more choices, and more choices allow greater chance of attaining outcomes. Cognitive Coaches watch for cues that can guide their choices. Eye movements can alert a coach to be silent, as mentioned above, or inflectional stress on a word allows the coach to know an idea has special importance to the speaker, inviting a coach's follow-up. In a research review of leaders' influences on student learning, authors reported that successful leaders modify their behaviors to match circumstances and that 'We need to be developing leaders with large repertoires of practices and the capacity to choose from that repertoire as needed (Leithwood, Seashore-Louis, Anderson, and Wahlstrom 2004,10). The reason behind the eye movements is unknown. Ehrlichman and Micic (2012) suggested they might be related to how our higher mental functions, such as searching our memories for information, might have been involved. Eye movements are useful cues guiding coaches' use of pausing. When another person's eyes move up to the left or the right, for example, the coach infers the person is processing internally, most likely in pictures, and anything the coach says at that moment will interrupt that person's thinking.

The most effective coaches are conscious of their own and others' personal styles, patterns, and predispositions. They flexibly work in different ways with each individual according to the ways that person is unique. This trait is important for the development of trust because we all tend to be more comfortable with, and therefore trust more easily, people with similar styles. A teacher whose primary strength is visual may best be served by coaching practices that employ visual terms-show, see, picture, enlarge, and so forth-while the same coach might work with an auditorily oriented teacher using more hearing words-tone, rhythm, or resonate, for example.

In most cases, flexible coaches personalize each moment of communication to the individual, responding to the representational

systems the other person is using. When a coach uses the other person's representational system, trust is enhanced, rapport in the moment is strengthened, and the communications require no translation. Exceptions to this principal exist. For example, sometimes a coach wants to stretch a person's thinking into a system not being used. In recalling what occurred in a lesson, a teacher's recollection might be limited to what she/he saw. Noticing this, a coach might ask, 'And what were you hearing that indicated students were succeeding?' More data now becomes available to the teacher.

Two types of cues indicate which representation system a person is using in the moment: language and eye movement.

One of the authors, as a teacher, had an administrator who was biased against the author. The author was working on gaining skill in detecting representational system language. By writing down words participants used in staff meetings, the author discovered that the administrator primarily used auditory phrases. (Other cues were there but were unnoticed until then, such as dimmed lights in the administrator's office and classical music in the background.)

The author was highly visual but knew the research on representational system matching and trust. Wanting a better working relationship with the administrator, the author began to use auditory terms when he was around the administrator. In a remarkably short amount of time, the administrator's attitude toward this author became positive. After that, the author no longer had to match language systems with his boss all the time; the connection had been made.