## Field Independence

In general, the field-independent person is task oriented and competitive and may be drawn to occupations in mathematics, engineering, or science. The term field independence is used because such a person doesn't need to view the whole system to make sense of things. She/he can isolate and work effectively with the details. This person often likes to work alone and emphasizes getting the job done. She/he works part to whole, perceiving analytically. The field-independent teacher is logical, rational, and likes to figure things out for herself. She learns through books, computers, and audiotapes. She/he is good at sequence and details, and she likes theoretical and abstract ideas.

The field-independent person who's placed on a committee might say, 'Just give me a job, and I'll go off and do it. Why are we talking so much? We don't need to get to know each other. We need to complete the task.'

The field-independent person wants the coach to focus on tasks. She/he wants independence and flexibility to make decisions based on data and analysis. She looks to the coach to be knowledgeable about curriculum and instruction, to maintain a professional distance, and to give messages directly and articulately. Although these traits seem to be inborn, many people learn to be flexible for different tasks-filling out income tax forms, for example, or hiking in the wilderness.

Jan, a middle-school field-independent teacher, looked back on four months of Cognitive Coaching and reflected that previously she had been extremely curriculum focused in her teaching, devoting her time and attention to the details of each activity. She had been 'administering knowledge' and successfully keeping students busy, but at the expense of some aspects of the students' cognitive development and personal growth. Through coaching sessions, Jan developed more balance in her teaching. The coach matched her interest in details and her language of specificity, which gave the coach and the teacher the safety to explore bigger questions: How does this lesson relate to long-term goals? What personal meaning do you want students to construct from this? Why is this important to you? (Garmston, Linder, and Whitaker 1993).