## EDUCATIONAL BELIEF SYSTEMS

To be truly flexible and maximally effective, coaches are discerning about, and work congruently with, educational philosophies different from their own. Different educators have different aims in education. Whether they verbalize them or not, educators hold deep convictions about their professional mission, their work, their students, the role of schools in society, the curriculum, and teaching. Furthermore, these beliefs are grounded in and congruent with deep personal philosophies and are powerful predictors of behaviors. They drive the perceptions, decisions, and actions of all players on the education scene.

Beliefs are formed early and tend to self-perpetuate (Pajares 1992). Changing beliefs during adulthood is a relatively rare phenomenon, and beliefs about teaching are well established by the time a student gets to college. Because beliefs strongly influence perception, they can be an unreliable guide to the nature of reality. The filtering effects of belief structures ultimately screen, distort, or reshape thinking and information processing.

People's ideologies significantly influence their educational decisions. The flexible Cognitive Coach recognizes colleagues' prevailing educational ideologies through their use of metaphors, educational goals, instructional methods, approaches to assessing outcomes, and teaching. The coach respects these beliefs (with the obvious exception of destructive orientations like racism and fixed mind-sets) and works with them to help fellow educators articulate and be increasingly effective in achieving their educational goals.

The coach's goal is to maintain trust and communication rather than to change beliefs. When the coach works within a colleague's educational belief system, trust is deepened, rapport is enhanced, coaching services are valued, and the coach becomes more influential. Ultimately, the colleague may become more conditional regarding his or her own educational philosophies and more understanding and appreciative of the educational beliefs of others. This movement, as a step toward greater cognitive complexity, is a developmental goal for all human beings. In their seminal work on educational belief systems, Eisner and Valance (1974) and Eisner (1994) describe at least six predominant ideologies that influence educators' decision making and fuel the ongoing debate among policymakers, politicians, parents, and the public in the 21st century. We do not intend to describe those ideologies fully here, but we present a brief

summary of our interpretation of each to illuminate their differences and manifestations in classrooms and schools.