## Academic Rationalism

Keeping company with such philosophic leaders as Robert Maynard Hutchins, Mortimer Adler, E. D. Hirsch, Arthur Bestor, William Bennett, and Chester Finn, academic rationalists are drawn to teacher-centered instruction. They believe that knowledgeable adults have the wisdom and the experience to know what is best for students. Their metaphors for education are the transmission of the major concepts, values, and truths of society, and they consider students as clay to be molded or vessels to be filled. They value and are highly oriented toward increasing the amount and rigor of student learning. They are drawn to the Classics (preferably original sources), Great Books, and traditional values. For them, the most worthwhile learning centers on those enduring ideas and artifacts that have

stood the test of time. The works that contain the greatest products of the human mind thus become the canon of the school curriculum. Academic rationalists believe that human nature is unchanging and that there are eternal truths to be discovered in a world outside of human beings. They therefore emphasize those perennial issues of human life as embodied truths. They appreciate basic texts and the teaching strategies of lecture, memorization, demonstration, and drill. They evaluate students through summative examinations, achievement testing, and content mastery. They speak about authority, humanities, basics, the disciplines, scholarship, and standardized tests as being central to effective instruction.