## Social Reconstructionism

Social reconstructionists are concerned with problems of society such as the future of the planet, the destruction of the food chain, the hole in the ozone layer, global warming, endangered species, the deforestation of timberland, the protection of wild-life, and the threat of overpopulation. Social reconstructionists view the learner as a social being: a member of a group, a responsible citizen, one who identifies with and is proactive regarding the environmental ills and social injustices of the day.

Social reconstructionists believe that we have gone beyond the age of representative democracies and have moved to a stage of participative democracies. They believe that this is a world in which we must care for our neighbors and take action at the grassroots level. The social reconstructionist teacher engages students in recycling centers, contributing to social issues, community service, cooperative learning, environmental education, and global education. Their metaphor of education is as an instrument of change, and they believe that schools are the only institution in our society charged with the responsibility of bringing about a better future and a better world. They are drawn to such activists as Pablo Freire, Alvin Toffler, Jane Goodall, Margaret Wheatley, John Naisbitt, Ralph Nader, Fritjof Capra, and Al Gore. They employ concepts such as environmentalism, democracy, consumer education, student rights, the 21st century, multiculturalism, futurism, global intellect, pluralism, change, save the Earth, ecology, peace, and love.

All of these belief systems are necessary and valuable aims of education. As Carl Glickman observes, 'When one concept of education wins out over all others and we are left with a single definition determined

by others for all of us, then we all lose' (2001). We want students to find spirituality and to become effective problem solvers, to be self-actualized, knowledgeable, efficient, and concerned. So the task for coaches is to become at ease with a variety of educational beliefs and to refine their ability to work with people whose beliefs may be different from their own.

Belief systems don't change easily. As we mature, the less likely we are to change. However, change usually occurs in three instances. If the prevailing culture begins to shift its values persistently and pervasively, we may begin to move our thinking. For example, the 1960s saw the pervasive influence of individualized instruction, and many of us began to behave more like self-actualizers. In the 1970s, social reconstructionism came to the forefront as we became aware of globalization and confronted environmental problems. With the onset of the information age in the 1980s, we realized that information overload demanded the exercise of intellectual prowess, and cognitive processing became paramount. The technological paradigm of the 1990s influenced our educational thought with high-stakes accountability and international comparison of various countries' science and mathematics test scores.

Teachers also adapt their belief systems to accommodate new realities. For example, a 12th-grade history teacher may take a position as a kindergarten teacher, or an instructor may move from an affluent school to one of pervasive poverty. In these cases, the teachers' paradigm changes and so do the beliefs they use to explain their role in their new environment. The third case in which beliefs might change is when a shift in identity occurs. See chapter 2 and Overcoming Resistance to New Ideas (Powell and Powell 2015).