## HUMAN VARIABILITY IN MEANING MAKING

We've examined three perceptual filters: representational systems (the way we represent thoughts in our minds), cognitive style (a biologically informed way of taking in information), and educational belief systems (five orientations toward learning that inform teacher practices). Next, we suggest that while each of the above plays an important role in teacher decisions and behaviors, four more filters lie behind the curtain and exert significant influence on teacher thinking and collegial communications. These four are race, ethnicity, and culture; gender; adult stages of

development; and generational distinctions. Culturally proficient coaches are sensitive to differences in each of these areas, and they adapt the coaching process for each person with whom they work. No person can attend to all these variations at once, nor possibly know each of them in a detailed way. Since coaches aim to develop their capacity to work with others, many coaches learn about one of these variables at a time, and then gradually increase knowledge of others. Coaching effectiveness increases with each new perceptual filter held by the coach. We've found that with multiple filters to consider, we can try on various perspectives as we work with others, testing which might apply.

We, as Culturally Proficient Coaches, are not only aware of these differences, but we are also aware of the danger of assigning specific behaviors to groups of people. We know that differences exist within cultures and at the same time most individuals have a need to identify with a larger culture group. As we wrote in the preface, this book is not written to inform coaches about the specific cultural characteristics of individuals or groups of people; rather, we offer you a frame for acknowledging those differences in ways that demonstrate a high value for diverse behaviors, perspectives, beliefs, languages, and cultures. (Lindsey, Martinez, and Lindsey 2007, 40-41)