## Racism and Language as Conveyer of Stereotypes

The big three stereotypes psychologists talk about are gender, age, and race (Raz 2014b). In a fraction of second, one makes a judgment about others: old, young, male, female, Chinese, black, Arab. This is an unconscious process and they show up as soon as you can test babies. Babies like to hear their own language over other languages. They like to look at faces that are familiar over those that are unfamiliar, and so on. So a white baby raised by white people prefers to look at white faces rather than black faces. Yet if the baby is white but raised by a multiethnic bunch, the baby will show no preferences.

Of the three big stereotypes, evolutionary theorists point out, race is an anomaly because noticing race has only occurred fairly recent in human history; we all looked alike on the African savanna. Sex and age are going to be relevant for any primate. There's no experiment that's ever found that children don't care about sex and age when making decisions. When kids pay attention to race, it's because they've learned that race matters in the world we live in.

So there's so many social psychology experiments showing-and this is really the pernicious side of stereotypes-that even in cases where we know a stereotype doesn't apply or we know it's mistaken, we're guided by it anyway and these are done for the most part, I think, by well-intentioned people who would never dream that they'd be racist, but we are influenced by factors we don't know about. (Paul Bloom, in Raz 2014b)

Humans have gut feelings, instincts, and emotions, and these affect judgments and actions for good and for evil. Generalizations about race are often flat-out wrong, But, says Bloom, we are also capable of rational deliberation and intelligent planning, and we can use these to, in some cases, accelerate and nourish our emotions and in other cases staunch them; it's in this way that reason helps us create a better world.