## Language Conveys Our Prejudices

In audio 10.1m4a, we are reminded of how language can evoke stereotypes. To listen, access http://www.thinkingcollaborative.com/supporting-audio-videos.

Culture can be seen as a set of rules for living, based on who people think they are, where they think they are, and the resources they perceive are available. We suspect that many of us, like fish in water, are not aware of the effects of our own culture and are much less sensitive to differences of those in groups who might perceive, think, communicate, and value differently from us. Writing about cross-cultural friendships, Pogrebin (1995) writes that when with another person who is different yet same in some respects, double consciousness is required. Gay-straight friendships must cross boundaries of oppression and culture, disability raises issues of independence and vulnerability, and age differences evoke different value systems and life experiences (Du Bois 1903). So, too, do differences in race, ethnicity, gender, and nationality cause challenges to successful relationships. If this is true about friendships, it seems even more so when the context is a work setting or a supervisory or coaching arrangement where additional requirements for interaction may be present. It is a peculiar sensation, says Du Bois, this double-consciousness, this sense of always looking at one's self through the eyes of others.

We often work in overseas schools and have become sensitive to the fact that when we work in Latin America, the Middle East, the Pacific Islands, or Africa, the local people we encounter have a polychromic sense of time, easily integrating tasks with socializing. When individuals from these areas come to live in North America, misunderstandings and judgments easily arise as they encounter the monochromic-scheduledlinear-oriented systems here. We sometimes witness misunderstandings and criticisms arising from these differing perceptions of time in faculty interactions and in parent-teacher conferences or scheduled parent meetings.

Many whites may rarely give thought to color, though people of color may often be conscious of it when in mixed groups. Featherstone (1994, iv) writes, 'For women of color remembering ourselves is a daily act of courage, a ritual of survival. We live the 'theater of the absurd,' understand at least two languages, speak in a variety of voices and view the world always from two perspectives.' In the anthology edited by her, professional women of color-Asian, Native American, African American, Latino, and Pacific Islanders-write of how color sets them apart, in their own eyes and in the eyes of others.

Immigration and birth-rate dissimilarities are changing the face and cultural texture of North America. As of June 23, 2014, the United States had a total resident population of 318,264,000, making it the third-most populous country in the world, yet still a miniscule part of it all at about 4 percent of the world's total population. It is becoming bigger, older, and more racially and ethnically diverse (Shrestha and Heisler 2011). 'Once a mostly biracial society with a large white majority and relatively small African American minority . . . America is now a society composed of multiple racial and ethnic groups' (1). Exact data are impossible to achieve because federal agencies are required to use a minimum of five race categories in data collection and one person could legitimately mark four of them and be accurate.

Data gathered during the 2010 census discloses an increasingly complex picture of diversity in the United States. Non-Latino whites remain the majority, with their share of the population dropping. The United States is estimated to be a 'minority-majority' nation within 35 years. Latinos of any race now make up 16.4 percent, up from 12.5 percent of the population in 2000. The racial breakdown of other groups is: African Americans, 12.6 percent; Asians, 4.8 percent, up from 3.6 percent in 2000; American Indians, 0.9 percent; and Native Hawaiians, .02 percent (U.S. Census Bureau 2011). Furthermore, an increasing percentage of the total population is multiracial. Increasingly, Cognitive Coaches will have to draw upon their flexibility as they interact with colleagues whose racial, ethnic, national, and cultural orientations are different from their own. But race and ethnicity are not the only determinants of culture. Persons living in urban and rural settings display distinct differences, as do people from different regions in the United States: the heartland, West and East Coasts, southern and northern states (Markus and Conner 2013). Conditions of poverty complicate the picture for educators working with parents as well as the number of adults in the home. In 2008, 1.7 million babies, or 40.6 percent of all births, were to unmarried women (Shrestha and Heisler

2011).

Communication meanings differ across cultures. The American 'OK' sign of thumb and index finger touching means 'money' in Japan, 'zero' in Russia, and is an insult in Brazil. Greetings in different countries can take the form of a hug, handshake, kiss on the cheek, kiss on both cheeks, and to complicate this further, if on both cheeks, some cultures go first to the right, others first to the left. Rudeness can be interpreted should a North American initiate a handshake on meeting a person from South America rather than kissing him on the cheek. Patterns of personal space differ. Contact cultures like the Middle East, South America, and southern Europe are those in which people tend to stand close together and touch each other frequently. In noncontact cultures like North America, people maintain more space between them and touch less frequently. When working in the Middle East, we have been reminded on a couple of occasions it was not appropriate for a man to touch a woman during conversation. Eye contact for North Americans is a positive, while in some Asian, African, and Latin American cultures it is considered a challenge.

What to do about all this? Perhaps personal action starts in the heart and mind-in the heart, feeling confidant in who you are and automatically presuming and valuing the goodness in others. A good source to learn more is Culturally Proficient Learning Communities: Confronting Inequity through Collaborative Curiosity (Lindsey, Jungwirth, Jarvis, and Lindsey 2009). Lindsey and colleagues describe ways of engaging all members of the staff, with a deep focusing on student learning that ultimately produces discoveries and action regarding inequities in the school. From the heart, we are reminded of the Hindu greeting Namaste spoken with a slight bow and hands pressed together, palms touching and fingers pointing upward, thumbs close to the chest: 'I honor the place within you in which the entire universe dwells. I honor the place within you, which is of Love, of Truth, of Light and of Peace. When you are in that place within you and I am in that place within me, we are one.' From here, we maintain 'double consciousness'-paying attention to the other person, our interactions, and ourselves. We are more aware of our attentiveness traveling outside North America than within, but a similar form of heightened awareness exists at home when meeting new persons of a different race. Should we feel initially threatened, we know our hearts will beat faster with blood rushing to the parts of the brain that prepare to manage perceived challenges. We remember to breathe, two or three deep breaths flooding the neocortex with oxygen. We may pause to have the other initiate greetings and subsequent conversation. We may align our pace and movements to be

more like the other person than we otherwise might do, keeping in mind that matching or copying may be perceived as artificial and ingenuous (Glaser 2014, 82). Partially we trust that positive intentions open physical and emotional changes in the brain that can lead to trusting, healthy conversations (Glaser 2014, 83). Further, when conversations are reflective and respectful, the speaker's and listener's brains show the same patterns of activation. Glaser reports research linking the heart with the brain; when our hearts are in synch with another person, signals are sent to the prefrontal cortex and other parts of the brain to trust and to indicate that we will not be harmed.

Educators working in international schools strive, particularly at the start of this 21st century, for the development of intercultural competence in our students-that capacity to move graciously and gracefully between and among cultures, without causing offense, treating those different from ourselves with dignity and respect.

'Cognitive Coaching stands the chance of being cross cultural. For example, 'listening with respect' probably cuts across all cultures and represents a value that I think most people would hold. The challenge, of course, is that such listening may take different form in different cultures. The values of CC, I think, represent cross-cultural ideals' (Powell 2014).