## GENDER

There are two main bodies of research on gender differences in communication styles: academic research and popular literature. Academic research points out major differences in neurology, conversation characteristics, and traits across gender, while popular research focuses on major stylistic differences in conversation styles between men and women (Merchant 2012). The problem in work settings is not the presence of different communication styles but the misunderstanding and misinterpretation that each gender has about the other's communication. Awareness of gender differences brings about change.

Neurological and psychological studies reveal very real biological differences between men and women that influence their perceptions of the world in subtly different ways. A number of gender differences are found in the hypothalamus, the portion of the brain associated with sexual behavior. Although some researchers caution that most gender differences are, statistically, quite small (Gorman 1992), recent brain scans from

healthy people have confirmed that parts of the corpus callosum are 23 percent wider in women than in men. Some researchers speculate that the greater communication between the two sides of the brain caused by a thicker corpus callosum could enhance a woman's performance in certain communication transactions.

'The brain structures for empathy show important quantitative gender differences. Plus, there is a qualitative divergence between the sexes in how emotional information is integrated to support everyday decisionmaking processes' (Christov-Moore et al. 2014, 2). Females have a stronger biological basis for empathy, but males can learn this trait. Women recall more details under stress and men do better in recalling the larger picture (Pletzer, Petasis, and Cahill 2014) because memory processing is affected by testosterone and progesterone in the amygdala.

Females are better at reading the emotions of people in photographs; males excel at rotating three-dimensional objects in their heads. For boys, activities are central to relationships. Girls create close relationships by simply talking. Women excel in their ability to simultaneously process emotion and cognition. However, these same abilities may impair a woman's performance in certain specialized visual-spatial tasks. For example, the spatial ability to tell directions on a map without physically rotating it appears strong in those individuals whose brains restrict processing to the right hemisphere. Brain research indicates that men listen with different parts of the brain than women, who listen with their 'whole brain.' By contrast, more women listen equally with both ears, while men favor the right one.

Women tend to be more expressive, tentative, polite, social, while men are, on average, more assertive and dominant when it comes to communication style (Basow and Rubenfeld 2003). Popular research has also shown gender differences in communication styles, from men being primarily goal oriented and results focused and women being relationship oriented, process oriented, and placing a high value on closeness and intimacy in interactions with other people (Tannen 1990; Gray 1992). Overall, both academic research and popular literature on gender differences in communication styles tend to agree on how men and women differ in the way they communicate. While academic research focuses more on the communication characteristics and traits that men and women exhibit, popular literature makes the connection between psychological gender traits and communication styles and gender differences in terms of basic goals of conversations (Merchant 2012).

The biggest difference between men and women and their styles of

communication boils down to the fact that men and women view the purpose of conversations differently. Academic research on psychological gender differences has shown that while women use communication as a tool to enhance social connections and create relationships, men use language to exert dominance and achieve tangible outcomes.

On average, women use more expressive, tentative, and polite language than men do, especially in situations of conflict. Men, on the other hand, are viewed as more likely than women to offer solutions to problems in order to avoid further seemingly unnecessary discussions of interpersonal problems (Basow and Rubenfeld 2003).

Sociolinguist Deborah Tannen (1990) finds that men and women converse for different purposes. Men talk, she says, to establish independence and status and to report information. Women, on the other hand, tend to use talk to establish intimacy and relationship. In a sense, women's talk is about establishing the fact that we are 'close and the same,' and men's talk is to establish the fact that we are 'separate and different.'

Men tend to operate in conversations as individuals in a social world in which they are either one-up or one-down. Women tend to operate as individuals in a network of connections. This is not to say that women are not interested in status and avoiding failure, but these are not consistent goals. Tannen summarizes these differences as 'men talk to report, women talk to rapport.'

In mixed-gender groups, at public gatherings, and in many informal conversations, men spend more time talking than do women. Men are more likely than women to interrupt the speaking of other people. A study of faculty meetings revealed that women are more likely than men to be interrupted. In meetings, men gain the floor more often, and keep the floor for longer periods of time, regardless of their status in the organization. In faculty meetings, men tend to talk more often and for longer periods of time. Because women seek to establish rapport, they are inclined to play down their expertise in meetings rather than display it. Because men place more value on being center stage and feeling knowledgeable, they seek opportunities to gather and disseminate factual information.

Women are more likely to be auditory than men are. Women tend to ask more questions and give more listening responses than men do. In one startling study, Sadker and Sadker (1985) reported that teachers who were shown a film of classroom discussion overwhelmingly thought the girls were talking more. In actuality, the boys were talking three times more than the girls.

Because sex differences have been misused in the past to assert male 'superiority' and female 'inferiority,' many people are suspicious of the notion that physiological differences between the sexes can lead to different abilities or predispositions. Now we know that differences do exist but that they are also culturally reinforced. This does not guarantee that all men or all women will have the same characteristics, but it does reveal patterns.

One of the most important coaching findings from Tannen's work relates to the misunderstandings that sometimes develop out of the different purposes of conversation. For example, many women feel that is natural to consult with a partner before making a decision. Men, however, may view consulting with a partner as tantamount to asking for permission. Because men strive for independence, they may find it more difficult to consult. This drive for independence may also explain their difficulty in asking a stranger for directions (Goldberg 1991). Women, on the other hand, are more comfortable in asking a stranger for directions when they are lost because it literally affords another person an opportunity to be helpful to them.

Although research conclusions sometimes seem to conflict, the bottom line for the coach is to be aware of gender differences that may or may not exist. The most successful coaches tend to be androgynous in their communications, drawing on both the masculine and feminine characteristics reported by Deborah Tannen and others. Tannen (2014) writes that boys and girls are socialized differently, each tending to play with their own gender. Girls use language to negotiate and tend toward closeness, telling secrets and assuring themselves that they are all the same, while boys use language to negotiate status determining who is in, who is out (Tannen 2014). Successful male coaches can reflect the other person's emotions on their own face (a trait found more frequently in women), and successful female coaches can restrict the display of facial emotion when called for (a trait found more often in men). Skilled coaches of both genders place a premium on both goal attainment and developing and maintaining relationships.