## ADULT DEVELOPMENT: DIFFERENT WAYS OF MAKING MEANING

Another important area of human variability relates to the differing ways

adults make meaning. There is developmental growth beyond the childhood ages of Piaget's studies, and many parents today will attest that their own children seemed to continue to 'grow up' well into their 20s and 30s. Ellie Drago-Severson (2011) observes that because adults go through different stages of development, they need different types of support and challenges in their professional lives. Environments supportive of adult learning both affirm individuals as they are and provide opportunities for continued development.

Based on Harvard professor Robert Kegan's constructive developmental theory (Kegan 1994), Drago-Severson describes the three most common ways of knowing in adulthood. These are not ways of doing but rather ways of being. Most adults will roughly fall into one of these developmental perspectives. A few will occupy a way of knowing beyond these three. These developmental levels represent principles for how adults construct experience and organize thinking, feeling, and social relating. These different ways of knowing are of special interest to the Cognitive Coach because they may operate as containers for all the other ways of making meaning. As Denise Gerhart, a Kegan student and holistic health practitioner, describes it, each system of knowing is how a person organizes his/her understanding and interpretation of his/her experiences and, based on that understanding, devises ways to work effectively within the systems. It is not about progression through the developmental levels. Instead, the Cognitive Coach's 'role is to support the person as they are, and to stretch them in ways that they might consider trying for the good of the group, or the good of the situation, or for the good of the cosmos and so forth' (Gerhart 2014).

Some maintain stability at a given way of knowing for most of their adult life, finding value in their current way of being. Progression through these stages can represent a curriculum of sorts for adult development. Movement through the different ways of knowing is a product of mediational environments and the personal drives related to exploring new theories and dismantling old assumptions. Drago-Severson names the three most common developmental stages as instrumental , socializing , and selfauthoring . A small portion of adults may progress to a further developmental stage of being interindividual knowers . Progression through these perspectives requires increasingly complex mental operations.