## Instrumental Knowers

These adults tend to follow rules and understand their world in concrete terms, in contrast to those who engage in abstract thinking. Adults with this developmental perspective are pragmatic, will look to others for information useful to them, and will provide information they perceive might be useful to others. Conceptually they understand that observable events, processes, and situations have a reality separate from their own point of view, though they frequently have difficulty accepting points of view other than their own. These adults prefer defined parameters, may be prone to have dependency relationships, to seek approval, and to uncritically accept the values of others. They perceive others as either supporters or barriers to their goals. 'How am I doing?' this person frequently wants to know from students, colleagues, administrators, or coaches. Metaphorically this way of knowing might be depicted as an island, with the self as the centerpiece of interest or perhaps, more poignantly, as a still pool with all its rich complexities hidden it its depths.

Drago-Severson suggests we can support these adults by using concrete methods: Provide clear goals and expectations. Offer specific protocols for learning social skills related to aspects of being a professional educator. Include structures to engage in dialogue and standards for meetings, attending, listening, and sending skills in conversations and collaborative engagements with others, each of which can be instrumental in appreciating multiple perspectives. We see her recommendations as relating strongly to the state of mind of craftsmanship. In this regard, efficacy and consciousness also represent desirable states of mind to develop.