## CAREER STAGES

Adults learn, retain, and use what they perceive as relevant to their professional needs. As teachers mature in their professional roles, their needs change as well. Early-career teachers and expert teachers view their practice differently. Expert teachers draw largely from their tacit knowledge acquired from years of experience to create classroom conditions that facilitate access to, and successful learning for, diverse groups of students across content areas (Berliner 1988). Experts possess a special kind of knowledge about learners that is different from novices, knowledge that influences classroom management and is the basis for the transference and application of subject matter. Richly developed appreciation of and strategies for accommodating student differences and learning variables result in experts designing more-effective learning

environments and solving problems at a much higher conceptual level. Expert, experienced teachers tend to perceive problems from a much broader context and are able to draw upon their tacit knowledge to determine effective interventions. These conceptual strategies do not automatically appear in a teacher's mind; they are constructed through years of experience.

Teachers' developmental levels have a direct correlation to their performance in the classroom (Garmston, Lipton, and Kaiser 1998). These levels also correlate to their interactions with other adults in the school environment. Teachers who function at higher conceptual levels are capable of greater degrees of complexity in the classroom and are more effective with students. Teachers with more advanced conceptual levels are more flexible, stress tolerant, and adaptive in their teaching styles. Thus, they are able to assume multiple perspectives, employ a variety of coping strategies, and apply a wide repertoire of teaching models. In addition, they are responsive to a wider range of learning styles and culturally diverse classes. Teachers at higher levels of conceptual development can take an allocentric perspective, employing the learner's frame of reference in instructional planning, teaching, and evaluation. Understanding and being sensitive to these dimensions of expert teacher thinking can inform coaching practices with accomplished teachers.

In addition, expert teachers seem not only to perform better than novices do, they also seem to do so with less effort. 'Cognitive resources are limited in human beings but experts seem at times to stretch these limits; they seem to do more at a given level of expenditure of resources' (Sternberg and Horvath 1995).

Early-career teachers, on the other hand, tend to focus their attention on the immediate situation, on practical teaching techniques, on classroom management, and on relationships with students (Leat 1995). (As with all factors of human variability, there are always exceptions. Some earlycareer teachers focus on the broader level and some highly experienced teachers focus on the more technical level, probably as an influence of cognitive style.)

Beginning teachers move through several stages of emotional relationships to their job, which influences what they need from a coach. When they have completed a credentialing program, anticipation characterizes their emotional state. They are eager to engage and have big plans. Survival is the next stage, as reality hits. They are overwhelmed with aspects of the job they could not anticipate. Disillusionment often follows. They feel they are working hard but not getting anywhere.

Perhaps this is not the right profession for them, they think. Rejuvenation often follows the winter break. They have completed half a year, they have rested, the end is in sight, and they have gained some coping strategies to manage the problems they encounter. Toward the end of the year, reflection begins as they think about changes that they want to make for the next year. Finally, a second stage of anticipation begins as they look forward to the next year. Beginning teachers in year-round environments may not experience the extremes of the lows reported by teachers in traditional programs. Any educator working with new teachers knows how profound these differences are between the novice and the expert teacher. Career stage is one factor that calls for another form of coaching flexibility, adjusting the functions within a supporting relationship to match teachers' developmental needs without compromising Cognitive Coaching.

Regarding the mediation of individuation and psychological differentiation,

It is no less important to recognize and promote individual identityhence creating and reinforcing what we have labeled individuation and psychological differentiation. While the fusion that needs to occur through the mediation of sharing behavior is important, there is also the companion need for individuation, to value one's uniqueness. The individual has to be given the opportunity to learn that whatever is done, the way it is done, the way one thinks or expresses oneself, is absolutely acceptable and appropriate (when it is in fact so). (Feuerstein et al. 2015, 90)