## THE MENTAL MAPS OF COACHING

One of the most important capabilities that a mediator possesses is the ability to navigate between and within coaching maps and across support functions as described in chapters 1, 5, and 12, to guide mediational interactions. A map can be thought of as an internal representation, or scaffold, that displays the territory involved in a goal-oriented conversation. Knowing the territory, in this sense, allows the coach to make a conscious choice from the various routes that may be taken. The four mental maps, and their variations, guide the Cognitive Coach. They are as follows:

- 1.  The planning conversation occurs before a colleague conducts or participates in an event or attempts a task. The purpose of the planning conversation is to bring to consciousness in the colleague the importance, the mental processes, and the benefits of planning. The coach may or may not be present during the lesson or event being planned or available for a follow-up conversation.
- 2.  The reflecting conversation occurs after a colleague conducts or participates in an event or completes a task. The purpose of the reflecting conversation is to bring to consciousness in the colleague

- the importance, the mental processes, and the benefits of reflection. The coach may or may not have been present at or participated in the event.
- 3.  The problem-resolving conversation occurs when a colleague feels stuck, helpless, unclear, emotionally flooded, or lacking in resourcefulness; experiences a crisis; or requests external assistance from a mediator. This is explored in chapter 12.

Finally we offer a special-purpose map, the fourth, developed in response to the need for self-directed learning in reference to the pervasive use of teaching standards during this decade. It is:

- 4. The calibrating conversation engages teachers in assessing their own performance related to a set of standards or external criteria (Marzano 2007; Marzano, Frontier, and Livingston 2011; Marzano, Pickering, and Pollock, 2001; Danielson 2007; Hattie 2003; Silver et al. 2014). The aim of these conversations is not about external evaluation but rather to support the teacher in self-assessment and personal goal setting. To calibrate is to set a standard for performance by assessing the congruence with, or deviation from, that standard and then to modify the performance to become closer to the standard. The calibrating conversation map is explored in chapter 13.

The coaching cycle is a combination of these planning and reflecting maps, with some slight variations. It is conducted both before and after an event for which the coach may or may not be present and gather data. They can also be used in circumstances where no one serves in the role of an observer, yet a coach might engage a colleague either before or after an event (the coaching cycle is discussed later in this chapter).

These mental maps are not recipes, prescriptions, or step-by-step instructions. As maps, they simply display the territory, and travelers choose which route they want to take to reach their destination. Skilled Cognitive Coaches know these maps backward and forward. They use them spontaneously and know exactly where in the map they are during the coaching processes.

Alert to cues, the coach decides to shift from one map to another depending on the needs of the person being coached, the time available, and the context. For example, toward the end of a reflecting conversation, a colleague may begin talking about plans for future activities. The coach

might decide to shift into the planning map as a conversational guide. Or, during a planning or reflecting conversation, the colleague may seem frustrated, confused, or vague. The coach may decide to use the problemresolving conversation to amplify and liberate the colleague's internal resources in relation to a problem that seems overwhelming. Coaches may use the maps flexibly, but these maps are always the basic structure of the coaching process.

The ultimate goal of Cognitive Coaching is for the colleague to selfmanage, self-monitor, and self-modify. Therefore, the coach will bring these maps to the consciousness of the colleague to explore the benefits of using these maps and, over time, to transfer to the colleague increasing degrees of self-mediation. The mediator's greatest achievement would be to put him/herself 'out of business'!