## Monitoring the Event

Coaches do not specify data-gathering instruments for their observations. Instead, they assist the planner in designing the instrument in the planning conversation and in evaluating the instrument's usefulness in the reflecting conversation. The intent is to cast the colleague in the role of experimenter and researcher, and the coach in the role of data collector. In some settings, video might be used for the teacher to see his/her own instruction and student responses before a reflecting conversation (Knight 2014).

It is important for the coach to strive for specificity of what should be recorded. Data gathering during coaching is not the place for subjective judgments. Pursuing definitions and observable indicators of what behavior will look like or sound like will determine the objectivity and therefore the usefulness of the data. For example, the coach might say, 'You want me to determine if students are on task as they are working on their projects. What will you hear them saying and see them doing when they are engaged?' Or the coach might say, 'So your goal is to have the students comprehend the symbolism of this story. What data might I collect that would help you to assess your students' comprehension of the symbolism?'

It is also important that the coach invite the planner to construct the system for collecting the data. Data must make sense to the teacher during the reflecting conversation, which is the time when meaning will be constructed from the data. The coach might say, 'So my job is to collect evidence of students' engagement. How could I record that for you? When during the lesson should I record it? How often should I collect the data? Do you want me to record it on a seating chart? A checklist? Are there specific students you want me to observe?' Or the coach might say, 'In what form might I collect evidence of the students' understanding the symbolism of the story? Should I record all their comments? At what point in the lesson should I start recording? Do you want me to specify which student made which comment?'

Having clarified the instructional goals and how the teacher and coach will collect evidence of their achievement-and having determined with

the teacher exactly what data should be collected for teacher growth and how the data should be recorded-the coach is now prepared for the observation. During the classroom observation, the coach simply monitors for and collects data regarding the teaching behaviors and student learning as decided during the planning conversation. The coach may employ a variety of data-collection strategies, including classroom maps of teacher movement, audio and video recordings, verbal interaction patterns, verbatim recording of what teachers say, student participation, on-task counts, or frequency counts of certain teacher behaviors. Of more importance, however, is the teacher's perception of the data and the format in which the data are collected. Both must be meaningful and relevant to the teacher's self-improvement efforts.

As the reflecting conversation begins, the coach encourages the teacher to share his impressions of the lesson and to recall specific events that support those impressions. We have found that it is important for teachers to summarize their own impressions at the outset of a conversation. This way, the teacher is the only participant who is judging his own performance or effectiveness. The question 'How did you feel about the lesson' is often a useful opener, as emotion is a primary sorting mechanism for people and this question is open-ended enough to allow the teacher to reflect about the areas of greatest interest to him.

The coach also invites the teacher to make comparisons between what he remembers from the lesson and what was desired (as determined in the planning phase). The coach facilitates the teacher's analysis of the lesson goals by using reflective questioning. The coach also shares the data collected during the observation and invites the teacher to make inferences from the data. The aim is to support the teacher's ability to draw causal relationships between his actions and student outcomes. Drawing forth specific data and employing a variety of linguistic tools are important coaching skills in supporting the teacher as he makes inferences regarding instructional decisions, teaching behaviors, and the success of the lesson.

As the reflecting conversation continues, the coach will encourage the teacher to project how future lessons might be rearranged based on new learnings, discoveries, and insights. The coach also invites the teacher to reflect on what has been learned from the coaching experience itself. The coach invites the teacher to give feedback about the coaching process and to suggest any refinements or changes that will make the relationship more productive.

You may now wish to access the 12-minute video of a reflecting conversation using the link www.thinkingcollaborative.com/supporting-audio-videos/11-2/. In this video, Carolee coaches Ochan through a reflective conversation. You may wish to use the reflecting map in figure 11.2 to follow the journey.