## Coaching and Time

When new to Cognitive Coaching, some participants show concern about time to coach. When one has an identity as a mediator of thinking, every interaction is an impromptu opportunity to coach. Thus coaching does not require adding time to a person's already busy day. Coaching can be scheduled as a formal sit-down conversation, a hallway conversation, or as part of a planned coaching cycle or 'walk-through.' Often coaching occurs in the normal course of conversations throughout the day. As the identity of a mediator is internalized, Cognitive Coaches discover that coaching is something they use automatically. When approached by a colleague about something coming up in the future, the coach begins an informal planning conversation. When someone strikes up a conversation about a recent event or experience, the coach engages the conversation using the reflecting conversation map. Coaching is an investment in another person's capacity for self-directedness. It replaces less-productive patterns that may enable or create dependency.

Time, that precious and rare commodity, must be allocated for conducting the coaching cycle. Teachers engaged in peer coaching often establish times for the segments of the full conversation cycle before or after school, during planning periods, or even over lunch. Often, substitutes are hired or other resource teachers and administrators take the coach's class to free the teacher to conversation and observe other teachers. Hiring a substitute teacher for a day, to spend one hour in each grade level to free each teacher, is a powerful and inexpensive way to make some time for coaching.

The planning, observation, and reflecting conversations may consume extra time initially, because both parties are learning the process. However, that time diminishes as the expectations of the teacher are better

understood and the coach becomes more skillful. It has been found that highly proficient coaches working with teachers experienced in the process can conduct a planning conversation in about 8 to 12 minutes. This does not mean that speed is valued, however. It only points out that as experiences are gained, there is a greater economy of time for coaching.

Administrators and supervisors find time for coaching by incorporating it into their regular duties. They block out time on their calendars and inform their secretaries, staff, central office, and community that they will be in classrooms during these hours.

Arranging for coaching by peers is most often done informally, with teachers agreeing to meet at times convenient to them. Sometimes, however, substitutes have to be hired and teachers released. One school keeps a sign-up sheet in the faculty lounge to arrange for the substitute to take a class at a certain time. Often, the school administrator initially sets up a coaching session with the teacher, both of them suggesting and agreeing on a suitable time. As trust develops, the teacher will request the conversation with the administrator or other resourceful colleague.

Planning and reflecting conversations can be conducted in informal, unscheduled settings: in the teacher's lounge, in the car while driving, in the hallway on the way to or from a class or meeting, and even on the telephone or over the Internet.