## Resolving Problems: The Third Coaching Map

Our deepest struggles are in effect our greatest spiritual and creative assets and the doors to whatever creativity we might possess. It seems to be a learned wisdom to share them with others only when they have the possibility of meeting them with some maturity. We learn to remain attentive to the mood and outlook of the listener even before we begin to speak about the darker side of our existence.

-David Whyte

A stonishing advances in understanding the human brain have been made since the second edition of this book. Our earlier observations, intuitions, and studies about the role of the nervous system in problem resolving are being borne out in current findings from the neurosciences. Obviously more learning is yet to come. In this chapter, we explore what we now know about the most complex of the coaching maps and explain why the use of this map is effective, based on previous and new research. One dilemma in describing these responsively interactive processes in print is that the context for this map is problem solving, but not in the usual sense. Problem solving is often construed as a linear sequence: tell me a problem and together we can search out possible causes, and then envision a desired state with some probable alternative approaches to problem resolution. This lends itself to linear problem solving, in which both parties have the data and internal resources necessary for problem analysis and solution generation. This process is not effective, however, for the majority of problems that, by definition, are 'wicked'-problems that are nonlinear and recursive. These are the types of problems that engage conflicts inherent in holonomous dichotomies and in which the protagonist often approaches the problem situation already feeling defeated, confused, overwhelmed, or simply nonresourceful.

The approach to problems that we present is both simple and sophisticated. On the one hand, it is a search for what the person wants as a desired state. On the other hand, it is the identification and amplification of the internal resources necessary to generate and apply the strategies required to achieve the desired state. In concept it is simple; in execution it is complex. As illustrated in figure 12.1, it is a coaching conservation that moves one from an existing state of limitations to framing a state the choachee desires and locating resources through which it can be attained.

Figure 12.1. Problem-Resolving Conversation

<!-- image -->