## When to Use the Problem-Resolving Map

The problem-resolving map is used to assist a person who, when facing adversity, feels stuck, uncertain of what to do, or so emotionally flooded that it is difficult to make good choices. When people feel trapped in a situation without alternatives, their hearts beat faster, driving them into self-protective states rather than resourceful ones. In these instances, they need two lifelines: states of resourcefulness and thinking strategies to address the specific issue. Yet one without the other is not enough. When people are resourceful, electrochemical interactions occur that make available their inventiveness, their decision-making capacities, and a repertoire of steps they might take. Thus, a coach helps a colleague become more resourceful by accessing the colleague's internal resources, creating chemical adjustments in the bloodstream and thereby liberating reflective thinking.

Most often, pacing and leading is used in conversations specifically focused on resolving a problem about which the person feels stuck. However, if the coach senses the person is stuck and unable to think

clearly during a planning or reflective conversation, the coach may transition to this Cognitive Coaching map. Pacing and leading conversations are sometimes brief. More often they are extended, focused conversations in an environment without distractions. A coach paces to honor the existing state and create awareness of a possible desired state. This is done because any effort to 'resist' the existing emotional state by placating, advising, or denying causes the resistance and the person is driven deeper into 'stuckness.' This is a necessary first step before the coach 'leads' a person to locate and amplify his or her own internal resources-states of mind or knowledge-necessary to deal effectively with a problem situation. When nonverbal cues are congruent with verbal descriptions of the desired state and necessary resources, the coach and colleague reflect together about the coaching process. Matching or mirroring of perceptions might be synonyms for pacing. The goal of pacing is to let the other person know that his or her experience is understood without judgment. Pacing first reflects what is and then makes visible what is possible. In the following example, the response to the speaker might be called a pace and jerk because the speaker's experience was never really acknowledged.

Speaker: 'I'm feeling bad.'

Friend: 'Ohhh. You shouldn't feel that way. Look at the bright side!' By denying the speaker's feelings, it is more likely that the feelings stay unchanged. To pace, the coach should empathically paraphrase to reflect the emotional state of the speaker and give assurance that the speaker's condition is recognized and acknowledged. After several interchanges with repeated paraphrasing, the coach can then offer a description of what conditions the speaker might like to see instead of the existing state.

Leading begins after the speaker has indicated that the description of a desired state is accurate. By now, oxytocin has been released into the bloodstream. The listener and speaker are showing the same patterns of activation (Hasson, Ghazanfar, Galantucci, Garrod, and Keysers 2012). Then the coach begins a series of questions intended to help the speaker identify the states of mind or other internal resources necessary to achieve the goal. Leading locates, elicits, and amplifies the internal resources necessary to achieve what is possible.

It may be useful to keep in mind that the limbic system and the prefrontal cortex are sources for responses to coaching. Awareness of the structure and functions of these parts of the brain allows the coach to be intentional in managing their interrelationships. The limbic system (hippocampus, amygdala, hypothalamus) regulates emotions and memory.

It protects us by asking whether we are safe and triggers fight-or-flight responses if we are not. A limbic response is reflexive and short-circuits capacity in the prefrontal cortex (Sylwester 2005). The prefrontal cortex allows for reflective responses, including problem solving and decision making, thus moving us to action. These two structures work best together under conditions of relaxed alertness (Caine and Caine 1991)-that is, low stress and high challenge. Attention to emotional safety is the gateway to cognitive complexity, underscoring our emphasis on rapport in coaching interactions (Dolcemascolo, Miori-Merola, and Ellison 2014). Mirror neurons relate to learning social skills and cultural behaviors, and may be closely linked to empathy and rapport, essential in pacing (Rizzolatti and Sinigaglia 2008; Iacoboni 2008; Ramachandran 2011). Iacoboni (2008) speculates that there is linkage between the mirror neurons and the limbic system at the insula, which accounts for the human capacity for empathy. Figure 12.1 illustrates the problem-resolving conversation.