## Body-Mind Connections

Humans have an integrated body-brain system. What is seen on the outside is testament to what is happening internally. In this section, we explore some signals emitting from visceral, vestibular (which maintains balance and spatial orientation), and musculoskeletal neurochemical systems coaches use to interpret in-the-moment experiences of a coachee. For example, transitions from distress to eustress are consistently observed during pacing, as we saw in table 12.1. Dis is a prefix denoting, in general, separation or negation. Distress is 'bad' stress, separating us from our cognitive resources, leaving our body-mind system primed to protect itself in ancient ways. Eustress is 'good stress'; eu means 'good,' as in eulogy (good words) or euphoria (good feelings). Often, a colleague begins a pacing conversation with muscle tautness, shallow breathing, and other nonverbal indicators associated with emotional flooding and a shutdown from the neocortex. At the exact moment the coach makes a goal statement congruent with the teacher's desires, an immediate shift into eustress can be observed in breathing, posture, animation, and voice qualities. Given our understanding of the methods of information processing, our current hypothesis is that at the moment eustress is achieved, electrochemical energy is released to the body-brain system, stimulating two reactions. One reaction relates to neurotransmitters like serotonin, which move messages from neuron to neuron, make the brain more efficient, and metaphorically allow access.

A second reaction is that peptides, produced in the limbic brain and

routed through the bloodstream to the entire body, including the brain, carry chemical signals of hopefulness that are manifested as 'gut' reactions and changes throughout the autonomic nervous system.

Changes in the visceral, vestibular, and musculoskeletal systems can be observed in pupil dilation, breathing changes, pulse changes, and changes in skin color and muscle tone as skeletal muscles and visceral organs are affected. Even glands respond with discharges of tears, perspiration, or saliva. Hair follicles can become erect. The coach is highly attentive to these signals as feedback about his/her work (Ledoux 1996).

Emotions decide what is worth paying attention to, and one's sensing of the outer world 'is filtered along peptide-receptor-rich sensory way stations, each with a different emotional tone' (Pert 1997, 146). These are one of three information delivery systems in the body that produce the behavioral manifestations to which the coach attends. The other two are neurotransmitters (like acetylcholine, norepinephrine, dopamine, histamine, and serotonin) and steroids (like testosterone, estrogen, and progesterone). Oxytocin is one example of a peptide. It releases the chemistry of 'tend and befriend,' which is reported to be a feminine response to stress. Peptides regulate most of life processes and carry 95 percent of information transmission through the bloodstream to every cell in the body and brain. Less than 2 percent of neuronal communication actually occurs at synapses. Pacing releases oxytocin, and the coach recognizes when this occurs when changes in the coachee occur. These changes-we call them BMIRS (behavioral manifestations of internal states) can include full unlabored breathing, relaxed muscles, postural shifts, a softening of facial features, and speech-pattern changes apparent from a previously stressed state. All this information is important because it assures the coach that cognitive, emotional changes in the coachee are not 'skin deep,' so to say, but the product of fundamental, dynamical alterations occurring with body systems, assisting the coach's recognition of when a cognitive shift occurs. These behavioral manifestations of internal change will be elaborated below.