## COGNITIVE SHIFT

What occurs during a cognitive shift is what Kuhn (1962) might have labeled a paradigm shift -a discontinuous and often radical shift in point of view. But there is more. What we observe are cognitive shifts in which we experience a change in how our conscious and unconscious minds communicate with one another. Insight is often the stimulus for shift and is thought to represent a break in mind-set registering unusual activity in the anterior cingulate cortex and

may be related to detection of conflict between old and new cognitive modes at the moment of insight (Xiao-Qin et al. 2004). A cognitive shift may also suggest that regions of the brainbody system not previously engaged are now active, possibly related to an abrupt change from certainty to not knowing; visual to auditory processing; or egocentric thought to considering another's perspective. The shift is usually sudden and is noticeable by an observer. Sighs, laughter, changes in eye accessing, extended silence, postural shifts, unconscious movement of legs or arms, or other physical manifestations of neurochemical changes appear. In Cognitive Coaching, we see cognitive shifts often and most frequently in pacing at the goal statement stage and in an 'Aha!' moment during the lead. Euphoria often results.

Cognitive Coaches who facilitate cognitive shifts for their partner bring a valuable added quality to teachers in the conversation. Without such shifts, the teacher may experience a planning conversation, for example, as an opportunity to talk about what he or she has already decided, to gain greater clarity and precision about certain portions of the lesson, and to instruct the coach on how to serve the teacher as a data gatherer. When cognitive shift is facilitated, the coach has added a dimension totally unavailable to the teacher on his or her own. One teacher described this metaphorically by saying that without the shift, you have the equivalent of a good physical exercise; with the shift, it is akin to an aerobic exercise in which the very core and capacity of the being is strengthened.

Metaphorically, then, we regard the state of distress as being related to the chemistry of depression or frustration, and the state of eustress as a shifting to a chemistry of hopefulness or resourcefulness. We believe the paraphrase to be the heroine of this unfolding neurological drama. Pacing is paraphrasing, and its first function is to interrupt the decline of a chemical-emotional state and restore or refresh the chemistry of hopefulness. Skilled pacing honors and validates the emotions of the existing state without increasing the chemistry of defeat or frustration. Questions during pacing counteract this movement and reverse it to plunge the person into deeper negative chemistry. Exploring the speaker's frustration reinforces and often amplifies the body chemistry of negative emotion. Paraphrasing is so consistently associated with the physical signals of these changes because it often clarifies a person's feelings and conflicts, it is accepting of the existing condition (hence lessening physiological 'resistance' to it), and it leads the person to feel understood.

Bruce Wellman and Diane Zimmerman (2001) offer the following metaphor, illustrated in figure 12.2. The paraphrase acts as the fulcrum of a lever assisting the increase of chemical resourcefulness. As paraphrasing continues, levering action floods the bloodstream (and every cell in the body) with better chemistry. Envision a fulcrum under a lever. Paraphrases that acknowledge and clarify are like a fulcrum placed at about the middle in which some movement will occur. This will balance the chemistry. Paraphrases that summarize and organize move the fulcrum closer to the 'load' to be lifted and add more resourceful chemistry. Abstraction paraphrases that shift the logical level, which is the form of paraphrase

offered in a goal statement, move the fulcrum to its most potent spot, flooding the body-brain system with resources manifested throughout the whole body, including oxygen and glucose, which the brain needs for reasoning. A shift from limbic system dominance to neocortical dominance has been completed. Positioning the fulcrum closer to 'the load' reduces the amount of 'force' required to lift it.

Focused inquiry (the lead) is now possible for exploring solutions within the newly identified desired state. (See descriptions of these forms of paraphrase in chapter 3.) During distress, the limbic system is in command, focusing inward, which is its function. The neocortex looks outward and can attend to situations and oneself from a neutral observation point. (See 'How Do I Know When I Am Finished?' later in this chapter for a description of other physical signals stimulated by the autonomic nervous system.)