## RESEARCH: EMOTIONS MAPPED IN THE BODY

When people are emotionally flooded, feeling stuck, discouraged, experience low efficacy, or feel angry or bad about an event, these emotions play out in the body as changes in the facial expression, skin tone, posture, muscle tone, upper and lower limb activity, and gut sensations as discovered in the bodily mapping of emotions (Nummenmaa, Glerean, Hari, and Hietanen 2013). Psychoacoustics research has also detected changes in voice quality (Cook 2002, 4). Emotions are trigged by perceptions of events in the moment or in the past. Body mapping research was conducted with West Europeans and East Asians speaking four different languages. The researchers conclude that emotions are displayed in a culturally universal pattern across distinct body regions and that positive emotions (happiness, love, and pride) formed one cluster in the body, and negative emotions diverged into four clusters (anger and fear; anxiety and shame; sadness and depression; and disgust, contempt, and envy) in different body regions.

Most basic emotions were associated with sensations of elevated activity in the upper chest area, likely corresponding to changes in breathing and heart rate. Similarly, sensations in the head area were shared across all emotions, reflecting probably both physiological changes in the facial area (i.e., facial musculature activation, skin temperature, tearing) as well as the felt changes in the contents of mind triggered by the emotional events. Sensations in the upper limbs were most prominent in approach-oriented emotions, anger and happiness; whereas sensations of decreased limb activity were a defining feature of sadness. Sensations in the digestive system and around the throat region were mainly found in disgust. In contrast with all of the other emotions, happiness was associated with enhanced sensations all over the body. The nonbasic emotions showed a much smaller degree of bodily sensations and spatial independence, with the exception of a high degree of similarity across the emotional states of fear and sadness, and their respective prolonged, clinical variants of anxiety and depression. (Nummenmaa 2014)

In a typical emotion, regions of the brain send commands to other

regions of the brain and to almost every area of the body. Two routes send the commands. One route is the bloodstream, where chemical molecules act on cell receptors. The other route consists of neural pathways, and the commands along this route take the form of electrochemical signals that act on other neurons, on muscular fibers, or on organs. Organs (such as the adrenal gland) in turn can release chemicals of their own into the bloodstream. Each emotion shares a common biological core described by neurologist Antonio Damasio (1999, 2010):

- Emotion travels via the bloodstream and neural pathways; it acts on cell receptors, neurons or muscular fibers, or organs. Organs release chemicals into bloodstream.
- Emotions are collections of chemical and neural responses. All emotions contribute in some way to the advantage of the organism. The role of emotions is to assist the organism in maintaining life.
- Emotions are biologically determined processes, depending on innately set brain devices, established by a long evolutionary history. Learning and culture may alter the expression of emotions.
- Emotions both regulate and represent body states. They are produced in the brain stem and move up to the higher brain.
- All the triggering devices for emotions can be engaged automatically, without conscious deliberation. While individual variation and culture play a role in bringing on emotion, there is still a fundamental stereotypic, automatic, and regulatory purpose of the emotions.

All emotions use the body as their theater, but emotions also affect numerous brain circuits. The coach is attentive to bodily changes that signify involuntary changes in the autonomic nervous system. Although the coach can never know the exact meaning of each behavioral change, the coach can combine observations of BMIRS with her knowledge of the person, the conversation taking place, and her intuition to presume that a problem resolving conversation goal has been met. Voice, posture, breathing, gesture, muscular tone, and skin-tone color shifts are major sources of data. Specifically, the coach will look for the following:

- Major and sudden shifts in any of systems outside the conscious control of the coachee, as well as congruence in content of speech, voice, posture, and gesture.
- Manifestations of cognitive dissonance, as in shifts from certainty to uncertainty or in sudden insights. Bilateral body movements-

gestures with both hands-allow the coach to infer that right- and left-hemisphere integration is present regarding a topic.