## NINE PRINCIPLES OF INTERVENTION

To support colleagues in getting 'unstuck' and back to resourcefulness, a coach uses the tool clusters of pacing and leading. This strategy has been described in two stages: pacing, with four major verbal phases, then leading, with a more generalized map to guide choices. In addition, larger ideas than these are useful guides in promoting thinking and development. These ideas are principles of intervention we have adapted from the work of Stephen and Carol Lankton (1983).

Although theories of personality or human behavior are useful, they have shortcomings because resolutions are sought within the frame offered by the theoretical model. Since all models illuminate only selected views of human behaviors and place others in shadow, interventions based on theories of personality will always be doomed to partial success. In contrast, coaches working with the principles of intervention listed here

will find themselves limited by only their own flexibility.

- 1.  People act on their internal maps of reality and not on sensory experience. Each person perceives the world from his own unique vantage point, seeing it through frames of personal history, belief systems, representation systems, and cognitive styles. This principle reminds the coach to learn how the world appears to the other person and to sensitively gather data to understand the other person's maps and how they are constructed.
- 2.  People make the best choice for themselves at any given moment, essentially doing what they think is best. This principle does not suggest that people make the best choice possible, only the best choice available to themselves at the moment. These choices are not necessarily good choices or the most effective ones; they are what occurs to the individual in the heat of the moment. High emotionality will limit choices, as will strongly held positions or points of view.
- 3.  Respect all messages from the other person. Empathy and respect are critical resources the coach brings to the coaching relationship. Skilled coaches nonjudgmentally attend to and respect both verbal and nonverbal messages. This requires being attuned to the more subtle elements of communication-voice, tone, gestures, facial expressions, eye shifts, and speech metaphors.
- 4.  Provide choice; never take choice away. In several cases, Milton Erickson worked with suicidal persons. His approach was, in effect, 'Yes, that's one choice. What are others?' When we attempt to limit a person's choices, the person is often drawn even more stubbornly to the choice we've removed. Effective coaches exercise options.
- 5.  The resources each person needs lie within his or her own personal history. Erickson would frequently tell students or clients that their 'unconscious contains a vast storehouse of learning, memories, and resources.' Coaches need to be mindful that they are there to facilitate the teacher's access to these inner resources, not to offer a solution.
- 6.  Meet the other person in her own model of the world. The skills of rapport are especially helpful in connecting with another person psychologically. However, this does not imply that the coach must stay in the other person's model.
- 7.  The person with the most flexibility or choices will be the most effective. The greater a repertoire that teachers have, the greater flexibility and choice they have in terms of instructional strategies and classroom management. The same is true for the coach or any

- person in a helping relationship. When interventions fail, it is frequently due to the coach's inability to exercise the necessary flexibility.
- 8.  A person cannot not communicate. Even if a person is not communicating verbally, the person is still sending nonverbal messages. Some behaviors are very subtle, such as breathing shifts or a slight nod of the head. These behaviors are very important for the coach to attend to when coaching.
- 9.  Outcomes are achieved at the psychological level. This principle is based on the reality that several levels of communication operate simultaneously. One of these is the social level message carried in words. Another is the psychological message usually reflected in the voice tone, gesture, or emphasis. When these two levels of communication are incongruent, the psychological message will determine the outcome of communication (Garfield 1986). This principle reminds coaches to be conscious of and clearly intentional about their own levels of communication.