## The Calibrating Conversation

S ince the publication of the second edition of this book, a fourth map supporting teachers' self-directed learning was conceived, developed, and tested extensively by a number of Cognitive Coaches. The calibrating conversation uses an externally generated, locally adopted description of teaching excellence with the purpose of supporting the capacities and practice of self-directed learning and instructional improvement (Dolcemascolo, Miori-Merola, and Ellison 2014; Ellison and Hayes 2012). Calibrating is based on the assumption that a teacher is a continuing learner interested in refining her/his craft (craftsmanship) and as a result turns to other sources and research to do so.

Recently there has been a proliferation of documents proclaiming to describe elements of teacher excellence. (See appendix E: Sources of Standards). Many schools and school districts have adopted these standards and rubrics as part of their teacher evaluation practices (although some documents were not intended to be evaluative). Since evaluation, in itself, rarely leads to the improvement of performance while coaching does, it was deemed valuable to find ways to utilize these exemplars of excellent teaching with conversations in which teachers could be supported in self-assessing and self-prescribing improvements for themselves based on these external standards. There is, therefore, a need for providing an additional structure for rich, rigorous, and reflective professional conversations between principals, or other support personnel as they converse with teachers. Effective instructional leadership does matter according to Ebmeier (2003), who reports research indicating that skillful forms of supervision influence teacher commitment and personal efficacy. This chapter adds a fourth map to the Cognitive Coach's repertoire: the map of the calibrating conversation.

To calibrate means to measure and attune performance against an established standard. This is done by determining the deviation from a standard so as to develop proper correction factors. Calibrating conversations, therefore, are designed to assist a staff member to calibrate

his or her progress against a standard by understanding and engaging with a locally adopted and agreed-upon standard and by determining where his or her skill level falls. Many descriptions of teaching excellence are available; all draw upon the rich knowledge base in development about instruction. All address six domains of inquiry, though frequently with different terminology:

- What's worth learning? (Content knowledge)
- What works in teaching? (Pedagogy)
- What factors influence student learning? (Knowledge of students and how they learn)
- Who am I and who am I becoming? (Self-knowledge)
- How does the brain learn? (Knowledge of cognitive processes of instruction) (see chapter 8)
- How are collegial interactions continually strengthened and enhanced? (Knowledge of collegial interactions)

Districts develop their own, as is the case with the American School of Japan, or are state adopted, or they use descriptions of excellence or rubrics developed by Marzano, Danielson, Hattie, Saphier, Silver, Leithwood, or others (see appendix E: Sources of Standards).

The greatest distinction in the way the calibrating conversation uses instruments that might otherwise be used for evaluation is the focus on cognitive processes and on liberating internal resources for selfassessment, goal setting, and planning. Earlier we described self-directed learning as incorporating self-managing, self-monitoring, and selfmodifying behaviors. The calibrating conversation serves these goals well. In these conversations, the standards are less important than the quality of the dialogue fostering professional autonomy and self-directed learning. In order for the coachee to calibrate his/her progress toward the standard, the coach first supports the coachee in making meaning of the standards. Inviting the coachee to make meaning through dialogue is the first step that the coach takes to mediate the thinking of the coachee. The conversation becomes one of reflecting, analyzing, and objectively evaluating the results rather than a judgment of the person.