## HOW TEACHERS OWN STANDARDS

Standards, test scores, and rubrics-which propose to define teaching quality but which are developed and imposed without the teacher's involvement, comprehension, and commitment-lead to short-term, shallow results and ultimately to failure (Danielson and McGreal 2000). Sanford (1995a) suggests that feedback must be conducted within a system the person being coached has helped create. For insights to be useful, they need to be generated from within, not given to individuals as conclusions. This is true for several reasons. Teachers will experience the adrenalinelike rush of insight only if they go through the process of making connections themselves. Defining the practice as actions creates a more vivid picture inside the minds of the teachers as to what they will be doing, saying, or feeling if they are performing the behavior. It is more likely that we can agree on actions than on definitions. Teachers, therefore, would be invited to envision what they would see themselves doing or hear themselves saying when they, for example, use powerful questions. Thus they would translate the labels of the criteria for excellence and categories of performance into actions and tactics.

Teachers, who have the opportunity to decide what is good or poor, appropriate or inappropriate, effective or ineffective, are more likely to transfer these decisions into practice. This powerful approach to improving instructional practice focuses on the intellectual skills, perceptions, and decisions that underlie effective teaching.

Involving teachers in the development and application of these practices is another way for them to assess their own performance. The purpose is self-mastery. Teacher's self-authoring of descriptions and indicators of what they will be doing and saying if they are using the practice effectively promotes self-managing, self-monitoring, and self-evaluating. It also provides a mental rehearsal prior to performance. The intent is for teachers to describe the categories of behaviors, hold them in their head as they apply them (self-monitoring), and then self-evaluate their performance and make plans for improvement. Each category should be sufficiently clear so that teachers can learn from self- and other-observed feedback about their behavior and to seek ways to improve.

This would be true for breaking an old habit as well. When teachers envision what a behavior looks like and sounds like, it makes possible the replacement of undesirable habits. Change requires observing the pattern that we presently have and then making a conscious decision to break that pattern. We can put our attention to what was missing. We can begin to attend to changing our behaviors and seeing the benefit when we do so. For example, some teachers are unaware that their questions are posed in such a way as can be answered with a simple 'yes' or 'no,' requiring minimal thought by the students. Hearing, analyzing the structure of, and composing questions that require deeper, more complex thinking helps teachers compare their typical questions with these more thoughtful questions-which initiates a journey of replacing of old habits.

The categories of excellence can be derived from many sources (see appendix E: Sources of Standards). Any set of criteria may be used that is based on research, values, and staff agreements. The five states of mind described in chapter 7 could be used as categories to derive performance. For example, if school goals include student efficacy, consciousness, craftsmanship, flexibility, and interdependence, what would learning look like? What would teachers be doing if they use these as outcomes?

As an alternative to adopting external standards, school leaders could build common agreements among staff and provide time and practice as a group in translating them into observable behaviors. School mission statements can also serve as starting points. For example:

City High School is a home for the active mind-a cooperative community promoting knowledge, self-understanding, mutual respect, global understanding, adaptability to change, and a love for lifelong learning.

Based on this mission statement, conversations would center on what a classroom might look like if minds were active: What would we as teachers need to do to keep minds active? Or adaptable? Or cooperative? And so forth. Such endeavors would draw upon frameworks and research studies as informative sources rather than evaluative criteria.

Another reason for promoting self-evaluation for teachers is that it models the same values that we hold for students. We spend far too much time and resources evaluating students and thus we rob them of the opportunities to evaluate themselves. Self-monitoring and self-evaluating models a cascading quality that pervades the culture of the school and becomes a norm for all the school's inhabitants-for the leadership personnel, the teachers, and the students. Standards are not standards until they are owned. As long as they remain someone else's expectations, teachers will simply comply or conform rather than make real, authentic changes. Because systems can mandate compliance but not excellence, schools need ways in which the faculty and individual teachers can own externally generated standards. For achieving the goal of teacher ownership of standards, see suggestions in appendix A.