## Tools

Coaches navigate the map the tools below: using

- Pause to allow you and your partner to think.
- Summarize by paraphrasing your partner's thoughts from time to time by saying "So.
- Pose questions to explore thinking by asking; for example; "Specifically which area might you want to focus on?"
- Pose questions to explore thinking by asking; for example; "What are you aware of in students that is causing you to move to a higher level of performance?" your
- close attention to your partner; attend with your mind and you body. Pay
- Select a focus . In this region, the coach asks the coachee to decide on what aspect of the document she/he wants to focus. This is important, given that most documents contain a great deal of information. The selected focus should be one that can be addressed in the amount of time scheduled for the conversation. The coach might ask, 'On what aspect of the document would you like to focus today?' or 'What aspect of the document is of interest to you for today's conversation?'
- Identify existing level of performance or placement on a rubric and give supporting evidence . In this region, the coach is interested in finding out where the coachee sees himself on the document. The coach poses questions to specify thinking in order for the coachee to be clear about the data that supports his self-assessment. The coach might ask, 'Where do you see yourself currently?' and 'What might be some examples of how that plays out for you?' 'What do you see

- in your students' performance that leads you to see yourself here?'
- Specify desired placement and explore values, beliefs, and identify congruence with desired placement . In this region, the coach asks the coachee where she would like to be. This supports the coachee in establishing a goal or objective for herself, toward which she wants to move. The coach might ask, 'So at what level of competence would you like to be on this behavior?' This region is also designed to go to the deep structure of the coachee's thinking to validate the importance of the desired placement. The coach is interested in raising the consciousness of the coachee about the importance of the desired placement. The coach might ask, 'What might be some of the values motivating you to reach this level?' 'What makes this important to you?' 'How do you want to see your students performing when you reach this level?' or 'What would you need to tell yourself . . .?).
- Establish behavioral indicators for new placement . In this region, the coach is interested in having the coachee envision himself doing what it is he aspires to do. The coachee should be specific in identifying what it looks, feels, and sounds like to achieve the level he desires. The coach might ask, 'What might students notice that's different about you when you are performing at this level?' 'What might this change cause students to do differently?' 'What might it look and sound like when you reach that level?' 'Please describe some examples.' 'By when do you want to achieve that?'
- Describe support needed to get to a higher level of performance and commit to action . In this region, the coach is interested in having the coachee draw on her resources to determine what it's going to take to reach the goal/desired placement. The coachee should identify what support she will need to reach the goal. This support might be in the form of strategies, materials, or the support of other people. Once support is described, the coachee should state what she will do to implement the plan and the data collection tool(s) that might be used. The coach might ask, 'What might be some resources you will need to reach this level?' 'What might it take for you to apply these strategies?' 'What kind of help might be useful to you?' 'What is the most powerful step you might take?' 'As you implement your plan, what will you be aware of to know it is working?' or 'What data collection tool(s) might be helpful to you?'
- Reflect on the coaching process, explore refinements, and explore ways of using this process on your own . This is the same region that concludes the other Cognitive Coaching conversations. In this region,

the coach asks the coachee to reflect on the conversation in which he just engaged. The intent of this region is to give the coachee the opportunity to identify what was helpful and what supported thinking and to raise to consciousness the process of self-calibrating. The coach might ask, 'How has this conversation been helpful to you?' 'How has this conversation supported your thinking?' 'Where are you now in your thinking compared to where you were when we started?' or 'Given your desire for continuing improvement, how might the process that we engaged in today assist you in doing this on your own?'

Although the calibrating conversation is grounded in the Cognitive Coaching support function, it can also be used in each of the other support functions. Appendix D is an example of a teacher and coach in a conversation about a professional development leadership role in which the teacher is about to make a presentation to staff.

You may now wish to access the 15-minute video of a calibrating conversation. Using the link www.thinkingcollaborative.com/supporting-audio-videos/, select video 13.1 Calibrating Conversation . In this video, Sue coaches Carolyn through a calibrating conversation. Also note the use of a third point-the list of standards-in the conversation.