## Dr. Jenny Edwards

A s you have read the other chapters in this book, you might have wondered, 'Does Cognitive Coaching achieve its goals? What is the evidence that Cognitive Coaching is making a difference?' Numerous researchers have investigated the impact of Cognitive Coaching since it was first developed in 1984. First, Garmston and Hyerle (1988) examined the influence of Cognitive Coaching on professors' thought processes. Next, Foster (1989) studied the influence of Cognitive Coaching on teachers' thought processes. In 1993, Edwards investigated its impact on first-year teachers' conceptual development and reflective thinking; Garmston, Linder, and Whitaker (1993) explored its effects on middle school teachers' practices; Geltner (1993) investigated its impact on the reflection of graduate students; Liebmann (1993) explored the perceptions of human resource developers of the five states of mind; Lipton (1993) examined the reflection of administrators; and Sommers and Costa (1993) investigated the teaching practices of senior high teachers. Since 1993, researchers have studied the effects of Cognitive Coaching in a variety of areas and reported multiple findings.

This chapter begins with findings from studies that have shown increases in self-directed learning and the five states of mind. It continues with information about the benefits of Cognitive Coaching for students, for teachers and principals professionally, for supervisory relationships, for school staffs as teams, for mentoring and teacher preparation programs, and for individual teachers personally. Then, 12 research-based recommendations for implementing Cognitive Coaching are presented. The chapter closes with suggestions for further research. Earlier studies are presented first, followed by subsequent studies.