## SELF-DIRECTED LEARNING

One of the major goals of Cognitive Coaching is to create self-directed learners, and research evidence suggests that it achieves this goal. Garmston and Hyerle (1988) found that Cognitive Coaching increased growth in self-directed learning in university professors. Professors trained in Cognitive Coaching showed substantial improvement in using language more precisely in their teaching, as well as in expanding their teaching repertoires. In Edwards's (1993) study, first-year teachers who received Cognitive Coaching grew significantly on the conceptual level question 'When I am told what to do . . . .' They moved from 'black and white' thinking to having more 'shades of gray' in their thinking and to thinking more on their own.

Cognitive Coaching has been associated with teachers expanding their repertoire of teaching strategies with their students. In one study, two middle-school English teachers who received Cognitive Coaching expanded their teaching repertoires, requested greater student accountability, exhibited more power as they planned lessons, and became more conscious of their behaviors and options as they worked with students (Garmston et al. 1993). They also began to use the coaching behaviors of paraphrasing, probing, and gathering data with their students as they internalized the coaching process.

Administrators trained in Cognitive Coaching were asked to reflect on an event in which they used their Cognitive Coaching skills to obtain an outcome in their administrative positions (Lipton 1993). They made conscious choices and used paraphrasing, pacing and leading, and elements of rapport. They kept the five states of mind in their awareness, identified goals for their own growth, related their positive results to specific coaching maps and tools, and reflected on their growth in coaching. They also identified the next steps for their own growth, recognized their own growth as well as the growth of the person they were coaching, reflected on the importance of coaching for their staff, and expressed appreciation for being asked to reflect in writing on the event.

Teachers have indicated that an advantage of being involved in Cognitive Coaching is having the opportunity to learn and grow (Edwards and Newton 1994a). Teachers who had taken Cognitive Coaching training mentioned the following sources of satisfaction with teaching as a profession more often than those who had not taken the training: learning and growth, the ever-changing nature of the profession, the opportunity to make a difference, the opportunity to be creative, and relationships with school staff. In another study, when principals commented on the portfolios of teachers who were using Cognitive Coaching to help them

reach their goals, they emphasized their teachers' increased desire to learn and grow professionally (Edwards and Newton 1994c).

Awakuni (1995) found that teachers who were involved in a yearlong Cognitive Coaching program took on more leadership positions during that year, such as giving presentations to the faculty, increasing their involvement in state activities, and joining the school leadership team. In her study, teachers expanded their teaching practices over the course of a year, adopting such practices as team teaching, use of learning logs, peer tutoring, marketing strategies, student choices, multiple forms of assessment, exhibitions, interviews, and developing lessons based on learning styles. Both interview data and observations confirmed that they increased the use of inquiry methods, including asking more higher-level questions, varying their explanations and feedback to students, and involving students more in discussions. They also made changes in their classroom management, using more strategies to work with misbehavior, organizing the classroom to prevent behavior problems from occurring, motivating students with grades, and rethinking how curriculum was aligned. In addition, they adopted new strategies for teaching and assessing students, such as using cooperative learning, helping students to clarify their thinking in writing projects, and attempting to accommodate different learning styles through art, video, music, projects, and demonstrations.

Training in Cognitive Coaching has been associated with increases in the ability to solve problems. Teacher interns who received mentoring for a year by experienced teachers who had been trained in Cognitive Coaching wrote that they felt confident that they could solve problems, and they wrote evaluations of how they solved the various problems that they encountered (Burk, Ford, Guffy, and Mann 1996). They were able to draw their own conclusions rather than looking outside themselves for answers.

Edwards and Green (1997) found that teachers who had taken Cognitive Coaching training, when compared with a control group, spent more hours in workshops, both during school time and outside of school time. In addition, they had implemented more new teaching practices in the previous two years than teachers who had not taken the training. They also had more positive attitudes toward Cognitive Coaching and toward Professional Growth Planning, which was a method of self-evaluation that their district was using.

Poole (1987) and Poole and Okeafor (1989) reported that higher levels of efficacy, when coupled with more frequent task-focused interactions among teachers, predicted higher levels of curricular change. In a three-

year project in which Cognitive Coaching was utilized to increase teachers' implementation of standards-based education, teachers who coached each other increased significantly in their reported levels of use of standards-based education than did teachers in a matched control group (Hull, Edwards, Rogers, and Swords 1998).

Coy (2004) investigated the yearlong Transition to Teaching Program, of which Cognitive Coaching was a key component. In her study, protégés who were receiving Cognitive Coaching moved from being concerned about surviving to being focused on 'the success of students' (159). 'The data provided instances from the various focus groups, case-profiles, and field notes of examples of self-directed behavioral changes both in terms of the mentor and protégés' (146). In 'the final mentor focus group,' mentors pointed out a 'number of instances' of 'the protégés' selfmanagement, self-monitoring, and self-modification' (140). 'Self-directed learning was evident for mentors and protégés in that they recognized their strengths and weaknesses and either sought solutions to their dilemmas or modified their behaviors as they taught and learned' (148).

Batt (2010) conducted a study in which 15 teacher leaders were trained in the Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol (SIOP) for working with English language learners. After participating in the training, 80 percent of the teachers indicated that they were committed to implementing the model. In reality, only 53 percent of them implemented it. Then, they received Cognitive Coaching around implementing the model. After that, 100 percent of the teachers were fully implementing it, which was an indication of the teachers' self-directedness. This was also evident in the qualitative data. In addition, nearly all of the teachers said that students were benefiting from the SIOP model after they had received Cognitive Coaching.