## Studies on All Five States of Mind

Liebmann (1993) investigated how human resource developers from product and service organizations perceived the five states of mind. She found that they identified the states of mind of consciousness and interdependence, followed by flexibility, as critical attributes for all employees to have. They also placed a high value on holonomy for a democratic society.

Ushijima (1996b) studied teachers who had used Cognitive Coaching for a year and a half. They showed a 40 percent increase in efficacy, a 33 percent increase in flexibility, a 27 percent increase in consciousness, and a 37 percent increase in craftsmanship. Quantitative measures were supported by qualitative measures. When teachers used the coaching process at least four times, they showed gains in the states of mind.

Alseike (1997) focused specifically on measuring the five states of mind in her study, and she investigated factors that could have been associated with teacher growth in them. She found that teachers who had received Cognitive Coaching from experienced coaches scored significantly higher than teachers who had not received Cognitive Coaching on measures of efficacy, flexibility, consciousness, interdependence, and overall holonomy. No significant differences were found between males and females who received Cognitive Coaching in their receptivity to coaching, nor in their states of mind of efficacy, flexibility, consciousness, interdependence, and overall holonomy. Males scored higher than females on craftsmanship.

In Alseike's (1997) study, no differences were found in the impact of Cognitive Coaching on the five states of mind between teachers who had been coached by the principal, a building resource teacher, another teacher, or a combination of the three. In addition, no differences were reported by number of years of teaching experience for the states of mind of flexibility, craftsmanship, consciousness, and interdependence. Teachers with 16 to 20 years of teaching experience had higher overall states of mind, and teachers with 6 to 20 years of experience had higher

efficacy than did teachers with under six years of experience or teachers with 21 years or more of experience.

Ellison (2003) investigated the impact of weekly coaching sessions with a trained Cognitive Coach on 12 principals and four assistant principals over four months. They received six to eight hours of coaching in 10 to 13 sessions lasting between 20 and 60 minutes. They also responded to two reflective questions via e-mail after each coaching session. Data included the coach's observations and a 40-question survey designed to measure the five states of mind filled out by the administrator, three staff members, and his/her supervisor. The data from the principals, assistant principals, and their supervisors indicated that the participants had grown in the five states of mind. Participants grew the most in the states of mind of consciousness, craftsmanship, and flexibility. Each of the assistant principals told the Cognitive Coach 'that this was one of the most valuable professional development experiences in which they had ever engaged' (23). Five of the participants requested coaching after the study had ended.

Slinger (2004) coached five first-grade teachers for nine weeks. As a result of being coached, the teachers reported that they were able to think on deeper levels and with greater clarity (consciousness), become more accountable for their actions (interdependence), solve problems (flexibility), feel the support of others (interdependence), feel as though they were challenged (efficacy), and target their teaching (craftsmanship).

González (2009) worked with priests, nuns, and lay people who were participating in a three-year course in Spiritual Accompaniment, as well as those earning their master's and doctoral degrees in spiritual theology or in Christian anthropology at a university in Rome, Italy. He developed the survey 'Relaciones con Dios y con el Prójimo' (Relationships with God and with Others) to measure the five states of mind related to the spiritual life. In the factor analysis of the instrument, flexibility was contained in efficacy. In addition, the state of mind of interdependence contained two separate subscales-Collaboration and Altruism. In other words, one type of interdependence involved working with others (collaboration), and the other type involved working for others (altruism).

González (2009) used four groups in his study. Participants in Group 1, who received the full eight-day training in Cognitive Coaching and received coaching twice a month from October through May, grew the most in the five states of mind from pretest to posttest (71.8 points overall, with significant growth from pretest to post-test in consciousness, craftsmanship, efficacy, collaboration, and altruism). Group 2, who only received coaching twice a month, grew the next most (56.8 points, with

significant growth in consciousness, collaboration, and altruism). Group 3, who only took the eight-day Cognitive Coaching training, grew the next most (40.2 points, with significant growth in consciousness and efficacy). Group 4, who did not receive coaching or Cognitive Coaching training, either regressed or stayed the same (-7.3 points, with no significant growth in any of the five states of mind).

Avant (2012) found that four effective instructional coaches demonstrated the five states of mind of flexibility, efficacy, consciousness, craftsmanship, and interdependence when talking about their practice, as well as elements of emotional intelligence (managing emotions, understanding emotions, perceiving emotions, and facilitating thought).

Henry (2012) compared the weekly reflective journals (13-15 weeks) of teacher candidates who had been exposed to Cognitive Coaching with the journals of teacher candidates who had not been exposed to Cognitive Coaching. She selected 18 journals from each group (every fifth journal), beginning with the journal entries from Week 4. She found that the teacher candidates who had experienced Cognitive Coaching 'were able to learn more from their experiences and used more words indicating higher levels of the five states of mind in their reflective journals' (Abstract).

Rich (2013) compared the experiences of 'two novice alternatively certified reading teachers positioned at two chronically underperforming and high poverty schools' (Abstract). One teacher received Cognitive Coaching from her, and the other teacher did not. She gathered data through interviews, observations, and four coaching cycles that included planning and reflecting conversations. She found that 'Cognitive Coaching substantially influenced her ability to self-monitor and self-modify her teaching behaviors' (124). The teacher became more efficacious, as demonstrated by her 'increased capacity to make informed instructional decisions resulting in improved learning outcomes for her students' (124). She showed an internal locus of control when she made errors. In addition, she became more flexible, as evidenced by her changing her instruction when she found out her students would learn more. She became more craftsmanlike, as evidenced by her continual quest to improve her teaching craft. She improved in asking questions and differentiating instruction. As a result, her students grew in their ability 'to think critically and to engage in complex thought' (124). She also grew in consciousness as evidenced by changing the decisions she made, as well as her behaviors. Rich concluded that:

all four states of mind played an important influence on Participant

01B's ability to make changes to her practice. However, if Participant 01B had not taken the time to reflect and to become conscious of her own teaching decisions and behaviors, she would not have been able to make the modifications that she made in the study. (168)

Thus, for Rich, consciousness appeared to be the state of mind that drove the other states of mind.