## Studies on Efficacy

Perhaps the most frequently investigated area in Cognitive Coaching research has been teacher efficacy. Numerous researchers have found benefits for students that were associated with higher levels of efficacy in teachers. These included teacher use of fewer control tactics with students (Ashton, Webb, and Doda 1983); more time in large-group instruction (Gibson and Dembo 1984); student achievement in reading, language, and mathematics (Tracz and Gibson 1986); more parental involvement and support (Hoover-Dempsey, Bassler, and Brissie 1987); greater use of cooperative learning by teachers (Dutton 1990); less teacher anger for student misbehavior (Glenn 1993); more teacher enthusiasm and higher student grades at the middle-school level (Newman 1993); and fewer referrals of children from low socioeconomic status to special education (Podell and Soodak 1993). In a study by da Costa and Riordan (1996), teachers with higher levels of efficacy were more willing to have other teachers observe them. Betoret (2006) found that teachers with higher levels of efficacy and more resources to help them cope had less stress and burnout than teachers who had lower levels of efficacy and fewer resources. In addition, Caprara, Barbaranelli, Steca, and Malone (2006) found a relationship between teacher personal efficacy, job satisfaction, and student academic achievement using structural equation modeling.

Edwards and Newton (1994a, 1994b, 1995), Edwards and Green (1997), and Edwards, Green, Lyons, Rogers, and Swords (1998) used the Teacher Efficacy Scale, developed by Gibson and Dembo (1984), to investigate the relationship between Cognitive Coaching and teacher efficacy. Krpan (1997) and Smith (1997) used the Teacher Efficacy Scale developed by Guskey and Passaro (1993), while Alseike (1997) used a self-developed measure of efficacy. Baker (2008) used Bandura's Teacher Self-Efficacy Scale (2006), and Maginnis (2009) used the Teacher Sense of Efficacy Scale (TSES) (Tschannen-Moran and Woolfolk Hoy 2001).

Skytt, Hauserman, Rogers, and Johnson (2014) used the Principal Sense of Self-Efficacy Scale (Tschannen-Moran and Gareis 2004). Wooten Burnett (2015) used the Ohio State Teacher Efficacy Scale (OSTES) (TschannenMoran and Woolfolk Hoy 2001) and the Physical Education Teacher Efficacy Scale (PETES) (Humphries, Hebert, Daigle, and Martin 2012).

Edwards and Newton (1994a, 1995) found that teachers who had been trained in Cognitive Coaching showed higher levels of teaching efficacy as measured by the Teacher Efficacy Scale (Gibson and Dembo 1984) than did teachers in a matched control group. In addition, teachers who frequently used Cognitive Coaching scored significantly higher in teaching efficacy than did teachers who used it less often (Edwards and Newton 1994a, 1995). In a follow-up study in the same school district, teachers who were trained in Cognitive Coaching had grown significantly in teaching efficacy between 1993 and 1996 (Edwards and Green 1997). Growth in teaching efficacy was correlated with length of time in the district, more positive attitudes toward Cognitive Coaching, implementation of a larger number of teaching practices in the previous two years, and more positive attitudes toward Professional Growth Planning.

Alseike (1997) investigated whether teachers who were coached by experienced Cognitive Coaches would score higher on a measure of the state of mind of efficacy that she developed for the study. She found that they did score significantly higher on efficacy than did a matched control group. She also found that teachers who had attended seven or more trainings given by experienced Cognitive Coaching trainers scored significantly higher on the measure of efficacy than did teachers who had not attended any trainings or who had attended one or two trainings, even though they had received coaching from experienced coaches. In addition, teachers who received Cognitive Coaching from experienced coaches and had never coached another teacher scored significantly lower in efficacy than did teachers who had coached another teacher seven or more times.

Edwards and Green (1997) examined teacher growth in empowerment as a result of Cognitive Coaching. Teachers who participated in Cognitive Coaching scored higher than a control group on all subscales of the Vincenz Empowerment Scale (Vincenz 1990) and on total empowerment. Teachers who grew more in total empowerment on the Vincenz Empowerment Scale indicated that they informally coached their colleagues more frequently, built rapport with colleagues more frequently, paraphrased colleagues more often, asked questions of their colleagues more often, and used pacing and leading more frequently. In another study,

higher levels of empowerment were also associated with more frequent coaching conversations (Edwards and Newton 1995).

Second-year, third-year, and fourth-year teachers who participated in a seven-month program of Cognitive Coaching grew significantly on the Teacher Efficacy Scale developed by Guskey and Passaro (1993), compared to a matched control group (Krpan 1997). They also grew significantly over the control group during the same period of time on written expressions of efficacy. In addition to scoring higher on the measure, teachers in the seven-month study grew significantly over a matched control group in their perceptions of their abilities to bring about purposeful change (Smith 1997).

Teachers who participated in a three-year project utilizing Cognitive Coaching to help them implement standards-based education grew significantly more in teaching efficacy on the Gibson and Dembo (1984) Teacher Efficacy Scale than did teachers in a matched control group (Edwards et al. 1998). Teachers with higher levels of teaching efficacy indicated that they used paraphrasing more frequently, asked questions more often, coached students and parents more, and generally used coaching skills more often than did teachers with lower levels of teaching efficacy.

Baker (2008) assessed the content knowledge related to Cognitive Coaching of 11 mentors and correlated it with the level of self-efficacy of 15 initially licensed teachers whom they were mentoring. She found that mentors who had a high level of content knowledge had mentees with high levels of self-efficacy as measured by Bandura's Teacher Self-Efficacy Scale (2006), and mentors who had low levels of content knowledge of Cognitive Coaching had mentees with lower self-efficacy.

Student teachers who received mentoring during a semester from clinical faculty who were trained in Cognitive Coaching grew more in teaching efficacy on the Teacher Sense of Efficacy Scale (TSES) (Tschannen-Moran and Woolfolk Hoy 2001) than did teachers who received mentoring from clinical teachers who were not trained in Cognitive Coaching (Maginnis 2009). Formative assessment and the language of support were most important in helping them grow in efficacy. Mutual trust, positive relationships, and formal feedback were also important in their growth.

Skytt et al. (2014) used the Principal Sense of Self-Efficacy Scale (Tschannen-Moran and Gareis 2004) to measure the efficacy of 15 experienced principals who coached 23 beginning principals. At the beginning of the study, the coaches' efficacy was significantly higher than

the principals' efficacy on two of the three subscales (Instructional Leadership and Management). Their scores did not differ on the Moral Leadership scale. After two years, no differences were found between the efficacy of the coaches and the efficacy of the principals.

Wooten Burnett (2015) used the Ohio State Teacher Efficacy Scale (OSTES) (Tschannen-Moran and Woolfolk Hoy 2001) and the Physical Education Teaching Efficacy Scale (PETES) (Humphries et al. 2012) to measure the efficacy of seven physical education teacher candidates in a master's program as a result of receiving three cycles of Cognitive Coaching (three planning conversations and three reflecting conversations) over a period of six weeks. Seven teachers participated in the control group. She also collected data from semistructured interviews, an openended survey, and the three cycles of planning and reflecting conversations. She found that 'Cognitive Coaching had a statistically significant impact on physical education teacher candidates' teacher efficacy measured by the PETES and OSTES' (121).