## Studies on Flexibility

Researchers have also found indications that Cognitive Coaching was related to increases in educator flexibility. Garmston et al. (1993) conducted a study in which Garmston used Cognitive Coaching with Linder and Whitaker, who were teaching. As a result of the process, Linder and Whitaker became more flexible in their thinking and teaching styles as they began to use the side of their brains that they formerly had not used as much. They became more balanced in using analytic and intuitive styles.

When asked about their sources of satisfaction in their teaching positions, teachers trained in Cognitive Coaching were more likely to mention autonomy and flexibility, as well as the opportunity to contribute to students (Edwards and Newton 1994c). Thus, they valued the flexibility that comes with teaching. In another study, teachers reported that they increased in creativity and flexibility as a result of being involved with Cognitive Coaching (McLymont 2000; McLymont and da Costa 1998).

Dougherty (2000) found that teachers who participated in Cognitive Coaching training liked the training, learned how to use Cognitive Coaching, changed their behavior, and obtained results from using their new communication skills. These were all elements of Kirkpatrick's (1998) model for evaluating the effects of training.

When 64 experienced third- and fourth-grade teachers from lowperforming schools who were in a master's-level program coached each other for four months focusing on using rubrics for teaching strategies and wrote reflections, they became more comfortable with peer assessment, more tolerant of the lack of structure that comes with working in groups at the college level, and more open to receiving feedback and ideas about their teaching (Fine and Kossack 2002). In addition, they developed more appreciation for Cognitive Coaching, used it in their classrooms, and shared it with others.

As Evans (2005) used Cognitive Coaching skills to coach two middleschool teachers in using research-based methods for teaching at the middle-school level, he moved from believing that he needed to tell teachers what to do to realizing the importance of listening to them. He also grew in his coaching skills the more he coached them. He believed Cognitive Coaching to be a way of improving instruction at the middleschool level. According to Evans, 'I can report to a teacher what I have seen during a three-minute visit; however, I have learned from this study that reporting on what I have observed will not lead to improved instruction. The teachers want to engage in professional conversations that will help their performance' (122).

'When teachers engaged in coaching conversations with the instructional coach and other teachers, they had opportunities to create new mental models and attempt new strategies and techniques they might not have otherwise attempted without support' (Reed 2007, 230). 'While teachers struggled to identify the process of Cognitive Coaching, they acknowledged changes in their instructional practice over time as they engaged in individual conversations with the instructional coach and met in cross-grade level groups with the instructional coach' (212).

Beltman (2009) found that teachers who participated in Cognitive Coaching training enjoyed the training, used the skills, grew in their understanding of coaching over the eight days of training, and refined their skills. In addition, they no longer felt like they needed to solve problems for others, and they continued practicing their skills. After eight days of training, teachers had a mean over 3.0 on a scale of 1 to 5, indicating that they felt that their training had made a difference, they consciously used the skills they had learned, and they were looking forward to more experiences in Cognitive Coaching. Wooten Burnett (2015) found that seven physical education teacher candidates in a master's program who received three planning conversations and three reflecting conversations over a period of six weeks became more flexible.