## Studies on Consciousness

Teachers in numerous studies became more conscious of their teaching as they reflected on their classroom practices. In a peer coaching program in which professors received 42 hours of training in Cognitive Coaching, they showed a maximum improvement in their ability to analyze and evaluate themselves. They also grew in self-perception and the ability to autonomously perform cognitive activities (Garmston and Hyerle 1988).

In a study of first-year teachers who received Cognitive Coaching from trained coaches, higher numbers of formal and informal interactions with coaches were correlated with increased growth on the Reflective Pedagogical Thinking Instrument (RPT) (Simmons et al. 1989), a measure of reflective thinking about teaching (Edwards 1993). In addition, the firstyear teachers who filled out more interaction sheets, which were their reflections on their coaching conferences, grew more on the RPT than did those who filled out fewer interaction sheets.

Graduate students in educational administration and leadership who used formative portfolio assessment, reflective practice, and Cognitive Coaching indicated that they deepened in their understanding, had opportunities to create meaning, and were able to engage in metacognitive analysis. They also said that their ability to link theory and practice was enhanced, that they had become more open to exploring complex problems because they were in a safe environment, and that they had redefined and reaffirmed themselves as developing leaders (Geltner 1993).

Edwards and Newton (1994c) analyzed the portfolios of teachers who were using Cognitive Coaching to help them reach their goals. In their comments on the portfolios, principals emphasized their teachers' growth in self-reflection. In a study by Clinard, Ariav, Beeson, Minor, and Dwyer (1995), teachers who used Cognitive Coaching with student teachers became more reflective as they reexamined their teaching methods and classroom management strategies, revisited strategies they had been using for many years, and brainstormed teaching ideas with their colleagues.

More training in Cognitive Coaching correlated with higher levels of consciousness in one study (Alseike 1997). Teachers who participated in seven or more training sessions scored significantly higher in the state of mind of consciousness than did teachers who had not attended any trainings or had attended one or two trainings, even though they had received coaching from experienced coaches.

Teachers who were supervising student teachers indicated that using Cognitive Coaching with their student teachers had impacted their own

teaching (Clinard et al. 1997). In addition, they found themselves using nonjudgmental feedback with their students and reflecting more on their lessons.

In a study of second-, third-, and fourth-year teachers, teachers indicated that they grew in awareness of their teaching practices as a result of Cognitive Coaching (Krpan 1997). They also indicated that they had become more conscious of their teaching practices.

Over an eight-month period, special education interns in a master's program who met monthly to learn and practice Cognitive Coaching skills grew significantly in awareness, skill development, and application of those skills (McMahon 1997). At the end, they had also grown in their ability to think reflectively, to self-analyze and self-evaluate, and to apply the coaching skills in their teaching.

Second-year, third-year, and fourth-year teachers who participated in Cognitive Coaching over a seven-month period increased their ability to think reflectively (Smith 1997). They grew in awareness about their teaching practices, became more observant, and gained greater insights into their teaching. This self-reflection helped them to redefine their perceptions about their teaching roles. They also grew in their appreciation for the value of self-reflection.

Schlosser (1998) found that teachers who participated in Cognitive Coaching training and coached each other reported that Cognitive Coaching assisted them in thinking more precisely about their teaching. They hypothesized that they had become more reflective as a result. In another study, teachers using Cognitive Coaching reflected more deeply on their practice at the end of the project than at the beginning (McLymont 2000; McLymont and da Costa 1998).

In Uzat's (1999) study, teachers who had been trained in Cognitive Coaching scored above the midpoint on the subscales of analyzing and evaluating, and applying on the Teacher Thought Processes questionnaire (Foster 1989). This indicated that Cognitive Coaching had impacted those two areas of their thinking about instruction, suggesting that they had grown in higher-order thinking skills (Uzat 1999). In addition, teachers scored above the midpoint on thinking more while they were teaching, 'using clear and precise language during teaching,' evaluating their actions while they were planning their lessons and teaching them, thinking about the behaviors they used while they taught, and thinking about possible alternatives while they were teaching (Uzat 1999, 61).

Jewish day-school teachers who received three cycles of Cognitive Coaching over a period of seven months were compared with a group of

teachers who received traditional evaluation, which included observations by administrators and letters containing suggestions after the observations (Moche 1999, 2000). They were also compared with a group of teachers who participated in informal discussions about their classroom instruction. Although all of the teachers grew on the Reflective Pedagogical Thinking Instrument (Simmons et al. 1989), teachers who received Cognitive Coaching grew significantly more than did the control groups.

During exit interviews after receiving Cognitive Coaching for nine weeks, first-grade teachers said positive things about Cognitive Coaching (Slinger 2004). They reported that the experience had impacted their thought processes. They spent more time reflecting about their practice at the end of the study, and they thought in different ways about their craftsmanship as teachers. In addition, they said that they felt supported and stronger as a result of having a coach, and they valued having the opportunity to be coached.

Robinson (2011) found that five teachers who received monthly Cognitive Coaching sessions from August to November and participated in a Community of Practice to support them in taking the National Board certification 'became more self-reflective in their teaching practice throughout the semester of study' (34). The teachers indicated that 'they more often analyzed why they teach, what they teach, and what the benefits on student learning might have been' (36). In addition, the teachers indicated 'that they believed [the Cognitive Coaching conversations] helped them through the National Board process' (37). Teachers spent approximately 75 percent of their time in their Communities of Practice reflecting on their practice.

Loeschen (2012) conducted a phenomenological study of four mentorteachers who had received four days of Cognitive Coaching training to assist their mentees. (Typically, the training lasts for eight days.) The teachers reported that Cognitive Coaching had influenced their own practice by supporting the way they reflected, helping them to experience cognitive shifts in the way they thought, and influencing the way they taught their own students. They increasingly asked themselves questions as they were teaching and afterward. They realized the need to reflect, and they connected their new thinking with what they already knew. They increasingly believed that asking themselves questions was important, and they used their questions to help them refine what they were doing with their students in their own classrooms.

Bjerken (2013) studied teachers at the elementary, middle, and high school levels in a school district to determine their thoughts about how

receiving Cognitive Coaching for four years had impacted their teaching. They had participated in three coaching cycles per year for four years with a certified Cognitive Coach. They filled out surveys and participated in focus groups. They indicated that they had increased in reflection and had decreased in their sense of isolation. Rather than focusing on the faults in their past lessons, they were able to focus on the positive aspects of lessons they had taught.

Chang, Lee, and Wang (2014) compared 117 elementary and secondary teachers who had participated in three days of Cognitive Coaching training and used the skills in their schools for a year with 117 teachers in the comparison group. They found that the teachers who used Cognitive Coaching improved significantly more than the comparison group in their ability to reflect on their practice, both in the strategies that they used and the content of their reflections.

Jaede, Brosnan, Leigh, and Stroot (2014) examined the influence of Cognitive Coaching on 28 middle school and high school mentor-teachers in an urban setting. They found that the mentor-teachers increased in their ability to reflect on their practice, and they were able to assist their interns in reflecting on their practice.