## Studies on Craftsmanship

Teaching is a craft, and another goal of Cognitive Coaching is to help teachers grow in their craftsmanship. As with the other states of mind, research evidence suggests that teachers do, in fact, grow in craftsmanship as a result of Cognitive Coaching. Bal and Demir (2011) developed the Cognitive Coaching Questionnaire (CCQ) to measure the growth of 180 preservice teachers in metacognitive skills as a result of receiving Cognitive Coaching. The teachers were studying in the Science and Technology Education Department at Çukurova University in Turkey. The instrument, which contains 34 items related to planning (five items), thinking (23 items), and evaluating (six items), had a reliability of .94.

According to Costa and Garmston (2002), teaching consists of planning, teaching, analyzing, evaluating, and applying. Foster (1989) conducted a study in which she examined the impact of Cognitive Coaching on teacher perceptions of their thought processes in those areas. She found that teachers who participated in seven or more coaching conferences perceived that Cognitive Coaching had a high level of impact on their thought processes in the areas of planning, teaching, analyzing,

evaluating, and applying. Teachers who participated in four to six coaching conferences reported that Cognitive Coaching had an average impact on planning, teaching, and applying, and a high impact on analyzing and evaluating. Teachers who participated in one to three coaching conferences reported that Cognitive Coaching had an average impact on their thought processes in these areas, and teachers who participated in no coaching conferences reported that Cognitive Coaching had a low impact on their thought processes in these areas. No differences were found between elementary and secondary teachers in their perceptions of the impact that Cognitive Coaching had on their thought processes. Furthermore, no differences were found in the perceptions of the impact on thought processes between teachers who were coached by an administrator and teachers who were coached by another teacher.

As a result of being coached for a year, senior high teachers reported that the coaching facilitated the achievement of their goals because they changed the strategies they used in teaching their students (Sommers and Costa 1993). In other words, they grew in craftsmanship.

Teachers who used Cognitive Coaching more frequently obtained significantly higher scores on the Self-Reflection Survey: Cognitive Coaching Rating Scale (Schuman 1991) than did those who used it less (Edwards and Newton 1994b). Subscales included Planning, Teaching, Analyzing and Evaluating, and Applying. Edwards and Green (1999a) found that practice in using Cognitive Coaching skills is essential to bring about the growth that is possible through Cognitive Coaching.

Alseike (1997) built on Foster's (1989) study and examined the impact of Cognitive Coaching on teacher thought processes. Teachers who participated in seven or more Cognitive Coaching training sessions scored significantly higher on teaching, applying, and overall instructional processes than those who had not attended any sessions or had only attended one or two sessions. All of the teachers received Cognitive Coaching from experienced trainers.

Alseike (1997) also examined the effects of Cognitive Coaching in a variety of coaching situations. She found that teachers who had been coached by experienced coaches scored significantly higher on measures of planning, teaching, analyzing, and applying than did teachers who had not received Cognitive Coaching. No differences were found according to years of experience in how teachers reported that Cognitive Coaching impacted their instructional processes in the areas of planning, teaching, analyzing, applying, or overall instructional process. Furthermore, teachers who received Cognitive Coaching from experienced coaches yet had never

coached another teacher scored significantly lower in teaching and applying than did teachers who had coached another teacher seven or more times.

Whether teachers were coached formally-including planning conversations, classroom observations, and reflecting conversations-or informally, they identified Cognitive Coaching as having a positive impact on their teaching (Alseike 1997). No significant differences were found between males and females who received Cognitive Coaching in their report of its impact on their planning, analyzing, and applying. Females scored higher than males on teaching. No differences were found in the impact of Cognitive Coaching on the instructional processes of planning, teaching, analyzing, and applying between teachers who had been coached by the principal, a building resource teacher, another teacher, or a combination of the three.

In their reflection logs, first-grade teachers who were coached during a nine-week period of time reflected continually about their teaching processes (Slinger 2004). This reflection resulted in the teachers changing their lesson plans and refining their instruction based on the data. 'Conversation topics shifted from relating that students 'had needs' to specifically identifying those needs and discussing what could be done about it' (164). The teachers felt affirmed from reflecting and became more conscious about how they delivered instruction in the classroom. In addition, the teachers reflected between the times when they were coached. They reported that being coached impacted their reading instruction 'in the following positive ways: (a) instruction became more focused, (b) more thoughtful planning occurred, (c) teachers increased their craftsmanship in particular areas of instruction, and (d) the status quo was questioned' (Slinger 2004, 153).

Evans (2005) coached two middle-school teachers on their implementation of research-based recommended practices for teaching middle-school students. During the course of five coaching cycles (including five planning conversations, five observations, and five reflecting conversations), the teachers moved from describing their lessons and reflecting on their lessons in general terms to being more specific about their lessons and reflecting in more depth.

Eger (2006) found that for veteran teachers who had received training in Cognitive Coaching who were mentoring second- or third-year teachers using Cognitive Coaching and had chosen to be supervised with the Cognitive Coaching model, 'Cognitive coaching has at least 'some' to a 'great' extent of impact on the four phases of teacher thinking, with the

greatest impact occurring at the evaluation and analysis phase' (50). When Eger (2006) gathered data to determine the effects of Cognitive Coaching on the four phases of teacher thinking, she found a significant difference between those [veteran] teachers that had three or more courses in cognitive coaching to those only having one course in cognitive coaching. Teachers with three or more courses in cognitive coaching had a greater ability when it came to clear and precise language, lesson planning, and evaluation of lessons. These same teachers reported that cognitive coaching helped them to monitor their progress when it came to implementing their lessons more so than teachers who had only taken one course in cognitive coaching. (54)

In Eger's (2006) study, veteran teachers 'discussed how cognitive coaching's reflective practice resulted in higher levels of thinking and more critical analysis of goals, lesson, plans, and teaching behaviors, as well as evaluation of their own teaching and student performance' (67). In addition, second- and third-year teachers who were coached by mentorteachers who had been trained in Cognitive Coaching reported that Cognitive Coaching had the most impact on supporting their emotional needs and helping them think about their behaviors in teaching students.

Fifteen teachers who had taken instruction in the Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol (SIOP) received Cognitive Coaching as they were implementing what they had learned with English-language learners (Batt 2010). The teachers in the study believed that they had developed higher expectations for their culturally diverse students as a result of participating in Cognitive Coaching.

Robinson (2011) found that five teachers who received monthly Cognitive Coaching sessions from August to November and participated in a Community of Practice to support them in taking the National Board certification improved significantly in 'perceived knowledge of their students' (31). They 'were more aware of setting high, meaningful instructional goals based on their knowledge of students and their needs' (31). 'They became even more consistently aware of who their students were and even more attentive to how they might meet their students' individual needs' (41). As a result, 'they felt better prepared to meet those student needs' (42). In their Cognitive Coaching conversations, they 'discussed students and their learning needs approximately 90% of the time' (43). In addition, participants spent approximately 75 percent of

their time in their Communities of Practice 'discussing [their] students and their learning' (44).

Robinson (2011) also found that 'after the intervention, the participants were more likely to agree that their assessment provided evidence of student learning' (32). The intervention 'provided structured opportunities for the participants to analyze and discuss their students' instructional needs, how they approached these needs through instructional strategies and the impact on student learning' (32). 'They were more aware of their students' prior knowledge and understood students' learning needs at a deeper level' (45). During their Cognitive Coaching conversations, they 'discussed their grade level curriculum and their instructional approaches approximately 80% of the time' (47). The teachers also 'began to align their teaching practice to the NBPTS standards' (49).

Lin (2012) studied the growth of 28 mathematics teachers in their instructional conversations over a year as a result of receiving Cognitive Coaching. She used multilevel modeling to analyze the data. Two coders analyzed the teachers' lesson plans for eight sessions. Additional data included the teachers' reflection journals, feedback from the coaches, and the observation notes from the coaches. Lin also conducted interviews with the coaches to clarify questions she had while analyzing the data. Lin found that the coached teachers grew consistently as a result of receiving Cognitive Coaching, noting that they had low scores on instructional planning prior to receiving Cognitive Coaching. Teachers grew the most after the first coaching conversation, the next most after the second conversation, and the next most after the third conversation. Teachers who taught at the elementary level grew more quickly than secondary teachers in their instructional conversations.

Bjerken (2013) studied teachers at the elementary, middle, and high school levels in a school district to determine their thoughts about how receiving Cognitive Coaching for four years had impacted their teaching. They had participated in three coaching cycles per year for four years with a certified Cognitive Coach. They filled out surveys and participated in focus groups. Participants focused more on the details of the lessons when they were being observed and coached than when they were not being coached. Teachers also focused more on planning for specific groups of students, as well as individuals. They became aware of how students were engaged while they were teaching, how they were interacting with their students, and how the students were learning. They expressed the desire for more specific feedback and ideas for improving their lessons. They wanted the coach to have taught their grade level and subject. Some

participants indicated that they were more able to know when students were achieving, and they were better able to measure student achievement. They believed that student learning had increased for the unit they were teaching and could not say whether student achievement in general had increased.

Diaz (2013) conducted a study in which teachers (grades 2-5) who were not associated with the National Board Certification process had the opportunity to experience the elements of the process. She compared three groups-Group One: those who received elements of the National Board Certification process, including Cognitive Coaching; Group Two: those who participated in the National Board Certification process; and Group Three: a control group. Each group included four teachers. Those in Group One received 8-10 coaching sessions in four months. As a result of reflecting, collaborating with one another, and working with a coach, the teachers in Group One grew in their ability to understand content knowledge and the needs of their students. They indicated that they were reflecting more, and that they were more focused on meeting their students' needs. They refined what they did as a result of reflecting on their practice. They talked about what they believed as teachers, and they explored the positive dispositions that they held as professionals.

Chang et al. (2014) compared 117 elementary and secondary teachers who had participated in three days of Cognitive Coaching training and used the skills in their schools for a year with 117 teachers in the comparison group. They found that the teachers who used Cognitive Coaching improved significantly more than the comparison group in their teaching effectiveness in the areas of communicating, grasping teaching strategies, and applying teaching strategies dynamically.

Donahue-Barrett (2014) investigated the effects of Cognitive Coaching with six elementary teachers in a writing workshop. She found that with four to six cycles of coaching, the teachers increased in their knowledge of writing instruction, as well as in their instructional practices. She also found that the planning conferences, demonstration lessons, and coteaching lessons were most effective in helping to increase the teachers' knowledge and instructional practices. The teachers said that they would have preferred to have had more time with their coach.

Jaede, Brosnan, Leigh, and Stroot (2014) examined the influence of Cognitive Coaching on 28 middle school and high school mentor-teachers in an urban setting. Their 'thinking and talking about teaching and learning moved from the generic question of 'How do students learn?' to the fine-grained and nuanced questions, 'How will I ensure these students,

in this classroom, in this school, in this community learn?' and 'How does who I am in the context of my classroom impact learning?'' (27).

Wooten Burnett (2015) studied seven physical education teacher candidates in a master's program who received three cycles of Cognitive Coaching (three planning conversations and three reflecting conversations) over a period of six weeks. Seven teachers participated in the control group. She also collected data from semistructured interviews, an openended survey, and the three cycles of planning and reflecting conversations. She found from the qualitative data that 'the planning conversation helped them become more aware of student needs' (96). The participants in the treatment group indicated that 'the planning conversation helped them (a) think critically-category 1, (b) set realistic expectations-category 2, and (c) be more flexible-category 3' (97). Finally, the participants indicated that they had 'become more aware of their lesson planning development' as a result of participating in the planning conversations (98). Data from the open-ended surveys indicated that the teachers in the treatment group had grown in their ability to plan lessons. They planned lessons to help students be successful.