## Studies on Interdependence

Another goal of Cognitive Coaching is to assist educators in growing in the state of mind of interdependence (Costa and Garmston 2002). In a study by McDonough (1991, 1992), principals identified their collaboration with supervisors on work goals, frequent interaction with and observation by supervisors, responsive practices, and trusting relationships as contributing to their growth. Sommers and Costa (1993) found that as a result of being coached for a year, senior high teachers talked more with their colleagues about their teaching and ceased being concerned about the extra time involved in coaching.

Teachers involved in a yearlong Cognitive Coaching program indicated that they were satisfied with their positions because of the support they gave to one another (Awakuni 1995). In a study by Alseike (1997), teachers who were coached formally-including the planning conversation, observation, and reflecting conversation-scored significantly higher on a measure of interdependence. She also found that teachers who were coached by experienced Cognitive Coaches scored significantly higher on interdependence than did a matched control group of teachers who had never experienced Cognitive Coaching.

Teachers who participated in Cognitive Coaching scored significantly higher than a control group on the Relatedness subscale of the Vincenz Empowerment Scale (1990), which was equivalent to the state of mind of interdependence (Edwards and Green 1997).

In Eger's (2006) study, which was done at the secondary level, 'there was a strong conviction that cognitive coaching was responsible for developing deeper and stronger relationships with their peers, as well as with their students' (57). Teachers said that Cognitive Coaching created more 'collaboration, more conversations, and improved relationships more so now than in the past' (58). They reported that they were able to listen more effectively, 'become more patient with their colleagues and students' (60), and improved in their relationships with others. In addition, Cognitive Coaching 'increased teachers' appreciation and awareness of what other teachers did' (60). They enjoyed having coaching partners who were in different departments.

Robinson (2011) found that five teachers who received monthly Cognitive Coaching sessions from August to November and participated in a Community of Practice to support them in taking the National Board Certification improved significantly in the way they 'viewed themselves as a community of practice' (31). Robinson suggested 'that the intervention may have had a positive impact as it provided structured time devoted to supporting the participants' needs as they navigated through the board certification process' (32).

Diaz (2013) conducted a study in which teachers (grades 2-5) who were not associated with the National Board Certification process had the opportunity to experience the elements of the process. She compared three groups-Group One: those who received elements of the National Board Certification process, including Cognitive Coaching; Group Two: those who participated in the National Board Certification process; and Group Three: a control group. Each group included four teachers. Those in Group One received 8-10 coaching sessions in four months. They talked about the ways in which they collaborated with parents and colleagues. They enjoyed having time to collaborate with their coach, as well as to watch videotapes of themselves and discuss what they were seeing with a coach. Teachers in Group One saw value in being coached.