## Teacher Encouragement of Student Thinking

Cognitive Coaching has also resulted in teachers encouraging student thinking. As a result of being coached for a year, senior high teachers taught more thinking skills to their students and modeled the skills of coaching (Sommers and Costa 1993). In their comments on the portfolios of teachers who were using Cognitive Coaching to help them reach their goals, principals emphasized their teachers' increased used of higher-level questions with students and their growth in communicating with and

working with students (Edwards and Newton 1994c).

In another study, high school sophomores viewed 10- to 15-minute videotapes of their teacher being Cognitively Coached twice a week for six weeks, and the control group of students viewed videotapes of the teacher reporting the results of the coaching conversation for the same period of time (Muchlinski 1995). Those who viewed the tapes of the Cognitive Coaching conversations increased in the use of verification behaviors in problem solving. The differences approached significance.

Students of teachers who were trained in Cognitive Coaching were assessed in their question-asking skills for quantity and quality (Ushijima 1996b). In one semester, 78 percent of the students increased the quantity of questions asked, 74 percent of the students improved the quality of the questions they asked, and 65 percent of the students reduced the number of irrelevant responses they gave. In one year, 85 percent of the students increased the quantity of questions asked, 91 percent of the students improved the quality of the questions they asked, and 46 percent of the students reduced the number of irrelevant responses they gave. Students of teachers who participated in more coaching cycles gained more than did students of teachers who participated in fewer coaching cycles.

In that same study, students of teachers who were trained in Cognitive Coaching were also assessed in their math problem-solving skills (Ushijima 1996b). In one year, 86 percent of the students showed gains in their math problem-solving skills. Students of teachers who participated in more coaching gained more than did students of teachers who participated in less coaching.

The use of Cognitive Coaching was associated with teacher use of more higher-order thinking skills in a study by Hull et al. (1998). Teachers trained in Cognitive Coaching grew significantly on the Encouragement of Higher Order Thinking Skills subscale of the Teacher Survey (McCombs 1995) over a matched control group. In another study (McLymont 2000; McLymont and da Costa 1998), teachers trained in Cognitive Coaching found themselves consciously creating an atmosphere of trust and nonjudgmentalness in their classrooms, seeking to help their students arrive at decisions on their own.

In a study by Eger (2006), veteran teachers at the high school level reported that 'Cognitive coaching had a significant impact on transforming their teaching' (61). They said, 'they learned new strategies that created a calmer classroom, more discussions and openness between teachers and students, and a greater sense of ownership in teachers and students solving their own problems' (61).

Irons (2014) explored the impact of training in asking mediative questions (Costa and Garmston 2002) and coaching with a trained Cognitive Coach for 10 weeks on the questions that one middle school teacher and five mentors asked their students. Sessions were recorded and transcribed for a total of 173 minutes. Participants filled out questionnaires at the beginning of the study and at the end. Irons found that the participants valued receiving coaching on how they were applying what they learned in the seminar; moved from asking closed-ended questions to asking open-ended questions; developed the language pattern of using the word space ; talked about how they had learned and grown as a result of the seminar; and indicated that their students were learning in the same areas that they were learning. In addition, they had implemented the elements of mediative questions into their practice.