## Other Benefits for Students

Cognitive Coaching has also been associated with other benefits for students. Cognitive Coaching was used as part of a program to restructure a Title I program by having teachers teach collaboratively rather than pulling the students out of class (Hagopian, Williams, Carrillo, and Hoover 1996). Teachers received training in how to manage instruction, Cognitive Coaching, pedagogy, and assessment. After two years, teachers showed significant improvements in their perceptions that the model impacted teaching and student learning.

In the study by Hull et al. (1998), teachers who used Cognitive Coaching decreased significantly in referring students to special education, compared with teachers in a matched control group. This finding was substantiated in the focus groups when teachers said, 'In the past when I had a student who was having difficulty, I would have referred him or her to special education right away. Now I ask a colleague to come in and coach me on how to make the student successful. As a result, we are able to make him or her successful in the regular classroom.'

Veteran high school teachers in Eger's (2006) study said that their participation in Cognitive Coaching as a method of supervision changed their teaching styles, which 'had an impact on the classroom environment' (62). They perceived their classrooms as being 'a lot friendlier' (62) and believed that 'they . . . were less reactive to situations and student behaviors' (62). They felt that they were more open with students 'during class discussions' (62). In their students, they saw 'more thinking about

answers and better connection of ideas and concepts' (62). They observed that, 'students are opening up and sharing things in discussions that did not occur before' (62). In addition, teachers felt 'a greater sense of calm working with colleagues and students' (64). Participants perceived that Cognitive Coaching 'influenced student behaviors, their thinking, and the climate of the classroom thus impacting student achievement' (64).

Eger (2006) found that when second- and third-year teachers received Cognitive Coaching from their mentors, they 'perceived that improving their instruction, providing a variety of lessons, and better classroom management resulted in greater student participation, more involved learning, . . . ultimately having a greater impact on student achievement' (92).

In Powell and Kusuma-Powell's (2007) study in which 14 students coached each other in their writing, the researchers perceived that the students increased in self-confidence in their writing and thinking abilities. In addition, the students in the study reported that they were applying the nonverbal and verbal skills that they learned in their personal lives.

Fifteen teachers who had taken instruction in Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol (SIOP) received Cognitive Coaching as they were implementing what they had learned with English-language learners (Batt 2010). Before receiving coaching, 53 percent of the teachers had implemented the model 'to a great extent,' while after coaching, 100 percent had implemented it 'to a great extent' (1003). 'Virtually all teachers reported positive effects on student learning as a result of SIOP implementation after coaching. . . . The self-reports corroborated with data obtained from observation ratings on the valid and highly reliable SIOP instrument (Echevarría et al. 2008, 1003). 'This study suggests that coaching has a direct and significant effect on teachers' instruction. The cognitive coaching phase heightened implementation substantially, even after teachers had already had an extended period of long-term ongoing training and peer collaboration in each school' (1004). In addition, 'all teachers reported gains in students' achievement as a result of heightened SIOP implementation following the coaching phrase, which both rewarded teachers for employing the framework and further motivated them' (1005).