## PROFESSIONALLY

Researchers have found that Cognitive Coaching affects individual teachers professionally. In a peer coaching program for professors in which they received 42 hours of training in Cognitive Coaching, the professors showed a maximum improvement in their ability to analyze and evaluate themselves (Garmston and Hyerle 1988). They also grew in selfperception and the ability to autonomously perform cognitive activities. In addition, they developed increased confidence in themselves and greater enthusiasm for teaching.

In a study by Edwards and Newton (1994a), teachers who had been trained in Cognitive Coaching said that some of the reasons they liked it were that it was respectful of teachers, it was nonjudgmental, and it made sense. In other studies, teachers who engaged in Cognitive Coaching were significantly more satisfied with teaching as a profession than were teachers in a matched control group who had not taken Cognitive Coaching training (Edwards and Newton 1994a, 1994b, 1994c).

Teachers were more positive in their comments about teaching and expressed more positive feelings about all aspects of their experiences as teachers than did teachers who did not take Cognitive Coaching training (Edwards and Newton 1995). Those trained in Cognitive Coaching listed 16 sources of dissatisfaction with their positions, and those who had not taken the training listed 57 sources of dissatisfaction.

Clinard et al. (1995) found that teachers who used Cognitive Coaching in working with student teachers reported 'renewed enjoyment and enthusiasm about teaching in the classroom' (21). In addition, they became more motivated to remain in the field of education. They became more aware of areas in which they needed to grow professionally, improved in their ability to communicate with others, felt more confident in facilitating the thinking of others, and became more respectful of others. In a study by Clinard et al. (1997), supervising teachers indicated that by supervising their student teachers using Cognitive Coaching, they increased in their sense of professionalism.

In another study, second-, third-, and fourth-year elementary school teachers grew significantly in seven months over a matched control group in expressions of how they had developed professionally (Krpan 1997). Those who participated in Cognitive Coaching indicated that they had grown in awareness of their teaching practices as a result of coaching. They indicated that they had numerous opportunities to grow and change

professionally.

Teachers grew significantly on Saphier's (1989) Teacher Professionalism and Goal-Setting subscale of the School Culture Survey over a matched control group after using Cognitive Coaching for a year (Edwards et al. 1998). Teachers who had higher scores on Teacher Professionalism and Goal Setting built rapport with others more frequently and participated in more coaching cycles. In addition, they increased in satisfaction with their positions and with their choice of teaching as a profession, compared to teachers in a matched control group (Edwards et al. 1998).

Edwards (2004) conducted interviews with teachers who were passionate about Cognitive Coaching. She found that those teachers were interested in 'Becoming' in their lives. She identified five steps in the process: 'Beginning the Journey, Learning for Becoming, Gathering Colleagues on the Path, Re-Identifying, and Continuing the Journey' (71).

In a study by Reed (2007), teachers experienced 'a renewed sense of professionalism' (231) as a result of being coached by an instructional coach, which brought about 'a more professional attitude,' as well as 'teachers' willingness to change their educational practice' (231).

Knaebel (2008) observed a literacy coach who was trained in Cognitive Coaching in a Reading First School in Indiana three to four times per week for four months in a qualitative single-case study. She also conducted informal interviews with her. Knaebel found that the coach possessed the following characteristics: credentials, knowledge of the research base, knowledge of what she was responsible to do, an in-depth understanding of the context in which she worked, and the ability to access the resources in her teachers. The competencies that she possessed included the ability to build trust and rapport, collaborate with her teachers, serve as a model, coach her teachers, conduct regular classroom visits, provide professional development to her teachers, and be organized.

Skytt et al. (2014) examined the self-reported competencies of 15 experienced principals who coached 23 beginning principals for two years. Both the coaches and the beginning principals were more competent and had acquired the behaviors fostering the competencies on the seven indicators on the Alberta Professional Practice Competencies for School Leaders (Government of Alberta 2012) by the end of the project.

Wooten Burnett (2015) studied seven physical education teacher candidates in a master's program who received three cycles of Cognitive Coaching (three planning conversations and three reflecting conversations) over a period of six weeks. They indicated that Cognitive Coaching helped

them to grow professionally.