## THE IMPACT OF COGNITIVE COACHING ON STAFF AS A TEAM

According to several studies, as faculty implemented Cognitive Coaching in their schools, the teamwork of the staff was enhanced and school cultures became more collaborative. In one study, teachers reported that, as a result of Cognitive Coaching training and implementation, they noticed more of a sense of community in the school, they talked more with each other about teaching, and the atmosphere in the school was more positive (Edwards and Newton 1994a). Teachers also indicated that they had more rapport with each other, they seemed more open to growth and new ideas, and they tended to evaluate themselves more frequently. They reported that positive influences on their attitudes toward Cognitive Coaching included the fact that it positively influenced their school's culture and that they were able to work together in coaching triads to support each other.

Ushijima (1996b) conducted a yearlong study of teachers who were using Cognitive Coaching. She found that team teaching improved, and teachers had more of a sense of community. Teachers trusted each other more, had greater resiliency, shared ideas more, felt more comfortable with taking risks, solved problems together, were more accepting of differences because of mutual respect, communicated more across grade levels, and gave and received more support and feedback in their work with children. In a study by Clinard et al. (1997), teachers who supervised student teachers using Cognitive Coaching indicated that they benefited because they were able to network with other educators.

Edwards et al. (1998) used the School Culture Survey (Saphier 1989) in a three-year study. Teachers trained in Cognitive Coaching grew significantly on the Administrator Professional Treatment of Teachers subscale over a matched control group. Teachers who felt that their administrators treated them more professionally also participated in more coaching cycles. In addition, teachers grew significantly on Saphier's Collaboration subscale of the School Culture Survey over a matched control group. Teachers who had higher scores in collaboration built rapport more frequently, participated in more coaching cycles, and believed that they had changed more as a result of their use of Cognitive

Coaching. In another study (McLymont 2000; McLymont and da Costa 1998), teachers using Cognitive Coaching to improve their teaching of mathematics developed a collaborative coaching community as they worked together to discover new insights about their teaching.

Teachers who had taken training in Cognitive Coaching reported that the training reduced their sense of isolation and helped them grow in trust (Dougherty 2000). They also felt more of a sense of collegiality with other teachers in their school.

When school district leaders wove Cognitive Coaching into all levels of the district, veteran teachers pointed out 'the improvement and incorporation of cognitive coaching in the culture and climate at various levels of the institution, whether it is the overarching district goals, changes in the classroom environments, or relationships among peers and students' (Eger 2006, 57). The teachers 'used terms like 'it is the way we do business here,' 'it is a culture of continuous improvement,' and 'the district is a more thoughtful district, more reflective'' (57).

Skytt et al. (2014) used the School Climate Index for principals (DiPaola and Tschannen-Moran 2005) to measure the perceptions of school climate of 15 experienced principals who coached 23 beginning principals for two years. Both coaches and principals increased on all four subscales. The coaches increased more on the Academic Press subscale than the principals. School climate increased in both coaches' and principals' schools. Teacher Professionalism increased more in the principals' schools, followed by Collegial Leadership, Community Engagement, and Academic Press.