## COGNITIVE COACHING AND SUPERVISORY RELATIONSHIPS

Researchers have also explored the use of Cognitive Coaching in supervisory relationships. First-year teachers who received Cognitive Coaching from trained coaches expressed more satisfaction with the supervision they received than did first-year teachers who received traditional supervision (Edwards 1993). In another study, Mackie (1998) compared teachers who used the Cognitive Coaching format with teachers who received traditional supervision. Those who used Cognitive Coaching rated the overall quality of the observation process significantly higher. They also indicated that the coaching process had more impact on their

teaching practices, as well as on their attitudes toward teaching.

Tarnasky (2000) found that community college department chairs tended to use elements of Cognitive Coaching and laissez-faire supervision when they supervised both full-time and part-time faculty because they tended to relate in more of a collegial manner with those whom they supervised, although they were not aware of the formal strategies.

Hauserman, Edwards, and Mastel (2013) conducted four focus groups with 19 teachers at a school in which the teachers were asked to compare their impressions of walk-throughs with Cognitive Coaching. The teachers had experienced walk-throughs by their administrators for a year, followed by Cognitive Coaching from their administrators for a year. The first theme of the study was 'Reflection as a Catalyst for Change' (14). The teachers indicated that the walk-throughs did not assist them in growing professionally, while Cognitive Coaching allowed them to reflect on their practice and gain insights. The second theme was 'Support and Trust' (16). The teachers felt that their administrators supported them in the Cognitive Coaching process, and they trusted their administrators. The third theme was 'Openness and Collaboration' (17). The teachers felt less isolated with Cognitive Coaching, and they were more willing to share their ideas with administrators and with other teachers. The teachers felt encouraged to grow professionally, and they increased in their abilities to reflect. In short, the teachers preferred Cognitive Coaching over walkthroughs.