## COGNITIVE COACHING IN MENTORING AND TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAMS

Cognitive Coaching has been examined in mentoring and teacher preparation programs. In one study, teachers in a graduate program of educational administration and leadership focusing on collaboration were coached each semester on their formative portfolios (Geltner 1994). In addition, they wrote reflectively on each document or artifact. They reported that Cognitive Coaching was one of the most powerful aspects of the program. They said that when they were in difficult situations later in their careers, they found themselves thinking about their coaching experiences and realizing that they had the resources they needed within themselves to be successful.

Student teachers who had received 10 hours of training in Cognitive

Coaching along with their supervising teachers reported that Cognitive Coaching provided them with a greater understanding of why teaching occurs the way it does, facilitated trust with their cooperating teacher, caused them to think deeply as they planned lessons, provided a common language for them to share with their cooperating teachers, and helped them anticipate the lesson in the planning conversation and bring closure to the lesson in the reflecting conversation (Townsend 1995). In addition, Cognitive Coaching provided a structure that gave them time to think about their teaching, required the supervising teacher to use the recommended coaching practices of nonjudgmental responses, helped them to own the lesson and to feel a sense of power, helped them when they received support, and worked best when the supervising teacher had confidence in Cognitive Coaching. Cooperating teachers reported that Cognitive Coaching helped them to become more conscious about their teaching, validated their beliefs about teaching, worked well for both progressive and traditional teachers, encouraged them to have collegial relationships with other coaches, enhanced the reflection of teachers who were already reflective, and helped them to realize the value of listening by using paraphrasing and probing. When student teachers who had used Cognitive Coaching in their student-teaching experiences were no longer encouraged or supported in using their skills, however, they tended to not take the time to engage in coaching (Townsend 1995).

Beginning teachers in the Student-Teacher Expanded Program (STEP), an alternative teacher-training program, participated in one-year internships and received mentoring from teachers who had been trained in Cognitive Coaching (Burk, Ford, Guffy, and Mann 1996). They were compared with teachers in a traditional 12-week student teaching program. Those who participated in the STEP program increased significantly over the control group on ratings by self, supervising teacher, and university supervisor on all subscales of the Proficiencies for Teachers Survey, including Learner-Centered Knowledge, Learner-Centered Instruction, Equity in Excellence, Learner-Centered Communications, and LearnerCentered Professional Development. The areas of Learner-Centered Knowledge and Equity in Excellence were the most robust.

Clinard et al. (1997) conducted a study in which supervising teacher mentors used Cognitive Coaching with their student teachers. They found that the training was an excellent way to prepare mentor-teachers. They concluded that Cognitive Coaching impacted mentors in all areas, including their work with student teachers, their own students, and other teachers. The supervising teachers indicated that by supervising student

teachers using Cognitive Coaching, they increased their sense of professionalism and were able to network with other educators.

When master teachers used Cognitive Coaching with their student teachers, the student teachers reflected on their practice, as evidenced by data from both the master teachers and the student teachers (Brooks 2000a, 2000b). The student teachers reported that the coaching they received from the master teachers helped them to reflect and grow. In addition, the student teachers noticed a difference between master teachers who had been trained in Cognitive Coaching and master teachers who had not received the training.

Coy (2004) investigated the yearlong Transition to Teaching Program, of which Cognitive Coaching was a key component. She found that during the year, mentors moved from a 'sense of failure and frustration as Mentors' to a 'sense of personal growth and empowerment' (142). In addition, they moved from not 'understand[ing] their roles as mentors' to having 'rejuvenated energy levels' (142). They went from having 'limited success attributed to 'Random Acts of Collaboration' between mentor and protégé' to 'recogniz[ing] sound mentoring practices' and 'recogniz[ing the] need for protégés to reflect on their practices' (142). Coy also found that the mentors were able to establish trust and rapport, and they moved from telling the protégé what to do to asking questions and paraphrasing in order 'to assist the protégé to be more reflective and self-directed' (146). She discovered that at the end of the project, 'the focus of the mentors . . . was the development of the protégé, not the 'cloning' of the mentor' (140).

Eger (2006) found that the more commonalities the mentor and secondor third-year teacher had (grade level, department, subject taught, etc.), 'the greater impact mentoring appeared to have when it came to the four phrases of their teacher thinking and behaviors' (99).

In a study of a mentoring program by Robinson (2010), both novice teachers and mentor-teachers mentioned Cognitive Coaching as being an important part of the program. In another study, McCloy (2011) worked with a student teacher and a mentor-teacher, providing five preobservation protocols based on the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards propositions, as well as postobservation protocols based on Cognitive Coaching. Rather than the focus being on the student teacher, the focus was on the mentor-teacher. The student teacher asked the questions of the mentor-teacher. McCloy found that the mentor-teacher benefited professionally from the experience. The mentor-teacher reported that the quality of the relationship with her student teacher facilitated her

learning, she learned from her student teacher, she learned to examine her own lesson plans more critically, she noticed the difference between the naïveté of her student teacher and her own experience and felt affirmed, and she felt a sense of accountability for providing accurate information to her student teacher.

Jaede, Brosnan, Leigh, and Stroot (2014) examined the influence of Cognitive Coaching on 28 middle school and high school mentor-teachers in an urban setting. They found that the mentor-teachers' use of Cognitive Coaching enabled them to become better mentors by focusing on the thinking and learning of their interns. They were able to assist their interns in becoming more autonomous, 'help the interns develop their own perspective about teaching, and create their own identity as a teacher in an urban context' (22). In addition, they found that the mentors changed their view of the role they played. They came to see themselves 'as teacher educators, mediators of intern learning' (23). They were focused on helping their interns grow each day, and they created 'a collaborative partnership with the shared goal of identifying evidence of student learning' (23). They also came to see themselves as teacher-leaders with 'collegial collaboration with colleagues, students and parents' (25).

Wooten Burnett (2015) studied seven physical education teacher candidates in a master's program who received three cycles of Cognitive Coaching (three planning conversations and three reflecting conversations) over a period of six weeks. According to the teacher candidates, Cognitive Coaching 'impacted their overall teaching experience' (109).