## Recommendation #1: Establish Long-Term, District-Level Support to Provide Training and to Support Teachers as They Are Implementing Cognitive Coaching

Numerous researchers have found the importance of school districts providing long-term, district-level support to implement Cognitive Coaching. District-level administrators and site-level administrators need to communicate about their expectations, value Cognitive Coaching, and make it a priority, according to Weatherford and Weatherford (1991). Johnson (1997) found that it is important for school districts to make a long-term commitment to Cognitive Coaching. If not, an elite group of those who have been trained is created. In addition, teachers may learn that innovations in teaching are 'here today, gone tomorrow.' Without long-

term support, teachers are expected to use their planning time and lunch periods for coaching.

Teachers will benefit from practicing Cognitive Coaching in meetings and other district events so that they can see the importance and value of coaching and internalize the skills (Johnson 1997). Teachers will benefit from having other teachers in their school who are trained in Cognitive Coaching so that they will have coaching partners (Johnson 1997).

Aldrich (2005) and Dougherty (2000) also observed that, for Cognitive Coaching to become embedded in school cultures, school districts and organizations need to support teachers over time. According to Eger (2006), when school district leaders wove Cognitive Coaching into all levels of the district, veteran teachers 'used terms like 'it is the way we do business here,' 'it is a culture of continuous improvement,' and 'the district is a more thoughtful district, more reflective'' (57).

Reed (2007) discovered the importance of allowing three to five years to implement Cognitive Coaching in a school or district. In her study, 'the teachers involved . . . did not have great success in the very first year and even faced some difficulty during the second year. However, they recognized in years three to five, they had developed strong educational techniques which accounted for their students' success' (236). 'Implementation of any innovation or reform is a process. It takes time to build capacity and understanding within a faculty/staff' (236). According to Reed (2007), it is important for school districts to involve the teachers' union early in the process of deciding to use instructional coaches in order to make sure that they understand and support their use.