## Recommendation #2: Enlist Principals' Support and Modeling of Cognitive Coaching

As with any innovation, principal support and modeling of Cognitive Coaching are key to helping teachers use it. Administrators need to be in favor of the process and participate in the training along with the teachers when Cognitive Coaching is implemented for maximum success, according to Weatherford and Weatherford (1991). In addition, they need to model the process, value it, and make it a priority. In a study by Edwards and Green (1999b), teachers who were in schools with principal support for Cognitive Coaching were more likely to persist in a three-year project in which Cognitive Coaching was used to help teachers implement standards-based education than those in schools without principal support.

Teachers tended to stay in the project when their principals participated in Cognitive Coaching training, supported the use of Cognitive Coaching, and modeled coaching behaviors. McLymont and da Costa (1998) also found that principal support of Cognitive Coaching was a key determinant of its success.

When principals have received training in Cognitive Coaching and supported the instructional coach, teachers are generally more willing to work with the instructional coach and value the coaching process (Reed 2007). In addition, the principal needs to hold teachers accountable for participating in coaching and understand that the instructional coach is supposed to serve as a coach to the teachers and not as an assistant principal. 'Principals and the campus leadership must not only be a part of the planning process but also understand what is expected of them during the implementation process and what they must establish as expectations for their campus' (234).

Reed (2007) also found that three types of resistance to using instructional coaches included 'resistance as a pervasive attitude by individual teachers, . . . resistance of the union, . . . [and] resistance to change' (176). 'There appeared to be a synergy between the themes of campus leadership and teachers' willingness and openness to learn. As resistance increased, the opportunity for implementation of the Cognitive Coaching SM process decreased' (226).