## Recommendation #3: Be Aware of Implementation Concerns and Use Tools Such as the Concerns-Based Adoption Model (CBAM) States of Concern and Levels of Use When Implementing Cognitive Coaching

Administrators should be aware that teachers will have different stages of concern and implement Cognitive Coaching at different rates. In Donnelly's (1988) study, administrators who were implementing Cognitive Coaching went through stages of concern and levels of use that were detailed in the Concerns-Based Adoption Model (CBAM) (Hall and Hord 2001). They tended to implement aspects of Cognitive Coaching that were similar to old methods of supervision first, and those that were unique to Cognitive Coaching were implemented later. In Donnelly's study, new administrators displayed early stages of concern, and experienced administrators displayed Stage Four concerns.

Schlosser (1998) also found that both teachers and administrators went

through the levels of the Concerns-Based Adoption Model (Hall and Hord 2001). Teachers in his study reported that the use of nonjudgmental behaviors, although powerful ways of mediating the thinking of others, seemed unnatural to them at first until they became accustomed to using them.

Reed (2007) discovered that teachers' concerns about the implementation of Cognitive Coaching aligned with the stages of concern in the Concerns-Based Adoption Model (CBAM), developed by Hall and Hord (2001). She suggested that when instructional coaches use Cognitive Coaching with teachers, they need to explain the Cognitive Coaching process, including the different types of conversations, the various responses that they make, and so forth so that the teachers will be able to understand what the coaches are doing. When teachers understand the process, they will become more accepting of it. 'While teachers may not need the eight day Cognitive Coaching SM  seminar training model, they do need an awareness of the process and terminology used by an instructional coach, principal, or assistant principal. They need to understand how the instructional coach uses the Cognitive Coaching SM  process as a tool' (234).