## Recommendation #8: Involve Teachers Right Away in Using Their Coaching Skills

It is important for administrators to involve teachers right after they have attended Cognitive Coaching training in using their coaching skills. In Foster's (1989) study, when teachers participated in seven or more Cognitive Coaching conferences, they perceived that the conferences had a high impact on their thought processes in planning, teaching, analyzing and evaluating, and applying. Teachers who participated in four to six coaching conferences reported that Cognitive Coaching had an average impact on planning, teaching, and applying, and a high impact on analyzing and evaluating. Teachers who participated in one to three coaching conferences reported that Cognitive Coaching had an average impact on their thought processes in the four areas, and teachers who participated in no coaching conferences reported that Cognitive Coaching had a low impact on their thought processes in the four areas. In another

study, teachers who used Cognitive Coaching more frequently obtained significantly higher scores on the Self-Reflection Survey: Cognitive Coaching Rating Scale (Schuman 1991) than did those who used it less (Edwards and Newton 1994b). Subscales included Planning, Teaching, Analyzing and Evaluating, and Applying.

Alseike (1997) reported that the more coaching the teachers received, the more they indicated that Cognitive Coaching impacted their planning, applying, and overall teaching, as well as their interdependence. Teachers who participated in seven or more Cognitive Coaching training sessions scored significantly higher than those who had not attended any sessions, or had only attended one or two sessions, on teaching, applying, and overall instructional processes (Alseike 1997). In addition, teachers who had attended seven or more trainings scored significantly higher in the states of mind of efficacy and consciousness than did teachers who had not attended any trainings or had attended one or two trainings, even though they had received coaching from experienced coaches. Alseike also found that teachers who received Cognitive Coaching from experienced coaches, yet had never coached another teacher, scored significantly lower in teaching, applying, and the state of mind of efficacy than did teachers who had coached another teacher seven or more times.

Edwards and Green (1999a) discovered that practice in using Cognitive Coaching skills is essential in order to bring about the growth that is possible with Cognitive Coaching. When teachers became involved immediately after receiving their training in implementing coaching skills and participating in coaching, they tended to persist in a three-year project using Cognitive Coaching to implement standards-based education (Edwards and Green 1999b).