## Recommendation #9: Structure Time for Cognitive Coaching

Participants talked about the importance of having time to use their Cognitive Coaching skills. Fortunately, many schools provide coaches, so coaching is built into the school day. This was not the case when many of the studies were done. Still, administrators and teachers need to be creative in finding time and money to enable teachers to practice Cognitive Coaching, according to Weatherford and Weatherford (1991).

Lack of time to do coaching was listed as the number-one source of dissatisfaction with Cognitive Coaching in one study (Edwards and Newton 1994a). Cognitive Coaching takes time, and teachers already have

many demands on their time (Belt-man 2009; Townsend 1995). Teachers who engaged in Cognitive Coaching who had taken seven to 12 days of training and had taught eight years or more indicated that shortage of time was a major hindrance to coaching and engaging in reflection about their teaching (Johnson 1997).

In Schlosser's (1998) study, teachers reported a tension between appreciating having the opportunity to work and talk with their colleagues and the lack of time in the school day. Coy (2004) discussed the importance of administrators providing time for Cognitive Coaching interactions between mentors and their protégés.

Five participants who were involved in an online coaching study said that lack of time to do online coaching and to attend training sessions inhibited the effectiveness of their practice (Aldrich 2005). They also listed not being able to communicate in person and problems with using technology as inhibitors.

While 'teachers perceived time as an obstacle that inhibited the implementation and use of the Cognitive Coaching SM  process, . . . teachers . . . identified time as a major factor in why they built such a strong relationship' (Reed 2007, 203). 'Leadership at both the campus and district level has to recognize the importance of building relationships and commit the time needed for development of those relationships. This is one of the most critical components, yet it is the one often overlooked' (235). In Batt's (2010) study, in order to save time and decrease the amount of time that students needed to spend with a substitute teacher, the teachers who were being coached employed phone conversations, e-mail discussions, and sticky notes on manuals with their coaches.