## Cognitive Coaching: Developing Self-Directed Learners and Leaders, 3rd Edition

Michael Fullan and Andy Hargreaves

W e are honored to write the foreword to this new edition of Cognitive Coaching: Developing Self-Directed Learners and Leaders by Art Costa, Bob Garmston, and their colleagues, Jane Ellison and Carolee Hayes. The first edition was published over 20 years ago and was titled Cognitive Coaching: A Foundation for Renaissance Schools . This 1994 book put coaching on the map. Cognitive coaching is a common accompaniment to and ingredient of change implementation now: a true mark of these authors' influence. Though not always grasped or used with the sophistication and depth of these authors' intentions, their work has had a massive influence on how we now think about the best ways to improve classroom practice-with other teachers, embedded in practice, rather than in the big ballroom sessions of staff development or in the isolated classrooms where individual teachers struggle by themselves. This interest in cognitive coaching has been carefully built by Costa, Garmston, and their growing band of followers and colleagues.

The United States goes through churns of system upheaval that never seem to land: No Child Left Behind (2002), Race to the Top (2008), and now Common Core State Standards. Cognitive coaching is, by contrast, one of the constants of improvement: learning how to be more effective and reflective by working with experienced and expert peers.

The timing and nature of the third edition is perfect. Piecemeal approaches can alleviate the worst of change but can never make the best of change. This is Costa and Garmston's conclusion. Their third edition goes deeper with greater precision. It identifies the skills, and now the mind-sets, that must underpin them. It is heavily action based, taking into

account the diversity of humans and their contexts, but it does this in relation to larger maps of action. It carefully examines issues of impact that in turn reverberate back on the skills, mind-sets, and actions of those who want to help. Above all, this book treats the solution as a system of interactions, not a checklist of competencies.

What the third edition adds is the guidance to convert Cognitive Coaches to true teacher leaders and instructional leaders. Both of us have just published books on the 'new leadership' for system change. New leaders are people who are lead learners, who participate as learners with others moving things forward, who operate in relatively flat organization structures and modes, who develop leaders in others and thereby make a greater short-term impact, and who pave the way for sustainable leadership, with meaning and depth. This new leadership is not the instructional leadership of the individual and overwhelmed principal who must take the instructional responsibilities of the school and its teachers onto his or her own personal shoulders. Nor is it the so-called distributed leadership of benevolent dictatorships that gets teachers to pick up more of the workload, involve them a bit more in decision making, and cultivate more pleasant staff relationships. It is engaged, embedded, and integrated leadership, exercised with a sense of collective professional responsibility and combined expertise in the service of all students' success.

In The Principal: Three Keys for Maximizing Impact , one of us (Fullan 2014) set out to rescue principals from being led down the path of micromanaging instruction toward becoming lead learners who help develop, in very specific ways, the collective efficacy of the group. These principals have the skills of coaches cum leaders and operate as 'system players' contributing to the betterment of other schools, in the district and beyond, as well as benefiting from these wider developments.

In the work that another of us coauthored on extraordinarily successful organizations in the three sectors of business, education, and sports (Hargreaves, Boyle, and Harris 2014), we found that uplifting leaders are not just executives and official sports 'coaches' but also inspirational players who lift other members of the team to excellent performance through example and explicit assistance. The coach doesn't have to be called the coach or to have the job description of one in order to coach effectively.

There is a convergence here. Note the new subtitle of the third edition: Developing Self-Directed Learners and Leaders . Cognitive Coaches become leaders, and leaders become Cognitive Coaches. More than this: We all become leaders and coaches-for ourselves, and always for others.

This is the true renaissance: deep spiritual mind-sets and meaning for humankind, mediation of collective consciousness, action that engages diversity, and exquisite awareness of our impact and its perennial potential.

The first-ever coach was a vehicle constructed five hundred years ago in Hungary to convey people from one place to another. The first coaching took place when tutors accompanied their students in later coaches as they learned and traveled at the same time. Cognitive coaching has come a long way since then-and in this magnificent and comprehensive book, it has truly come of age.

Michael Fullan and Andy Hargreaves, winners of the Grawemeyer Award in Education, 2015 March 2015