## Students

So far, researchers have primarily studied the outcomes of teachers coaching each other, or the outcomes of teachers being coached by administrators, university professors, or full-time coaches. A major area for future research involves studying what might happen when teachers coach students. In addition, what might be some of the outcomes if teachers taught coaching skills to students so that they could coach each other? In what ways might that impact student growth and thinking? How might student learning be accelerated through the process? How much might student test scores increase? What might be the impact on students' self-directedness? How might student increases in self-directedness influence their behaviors in the classroom, their study habits, their relationships with other students, and their learning?

Some possible areas to explore could be student time on task, selfdirectedness of students, students' views of themselves as self-directed learners, student identity, student interactions with one another in general, student ability to solve problems, frequency of students asking questions, number of discipline referrals, student grades, student development of higher-order thinking skills, and student growth in the five states of mind. Other possible areas to explore might be how student relationships with each other would change, how student relationships with the teacher could change, how student relationships with their parents might change, and how students resolve difficulties. What might happen at the different grade levels? Would similar outcomes occur at all grade levels, or would students in some grade levels change more quickly?