## WHAT IS NEW IN THIS THIRD EDITION

I n this third edition, we not only acquaint new readers with Cognitive Coaching but also offer experienced practitioners the benefits of recent developments, including information about advanced coaching skills, neuroscientific applications to coaching, and a clear focus on one's identity as a mediator. New understandings have emerged about the function and importance of personal identity in guiding beliefs, values, and practices. This book offers a coaching map not revealed before, a map for 'calibrating conversations' dedicated to the improvement of instruction. Calibrating conversations are designed to assist a staff member to calibrate his or her progress against a standard by understanding and engaging with a locally adopted and agreed-upon standard and by determining where his or her skill level falls. These conversations with an administrator, mentor, or peer coach lead to self-directed, targeted improvements in teaching practices. Because pictures add dimensions to comprehension that words do not, readers will find links to videos showing various conversations, interactions, maps, and skills central to understanding Cognitive Coaching. (See appendix G for a list of videos, their length, and the URLs to access the videos.)

Also new are expanded understandings of the process of mediation as provided by the initiator of this term, Reuven Feuerstein, the Israeli psychologist, in his last published work. Readers will learn how mediation, the primary tactic of Cognitive Coaching, not only changes the structure of behavior of the individual, not only changes the amount and quality of his repertoire, but also-according to increasingly powerful sources of

evidence from fields of neurophysiology and biochemistry-changes the structure and functioning of the brain itself in very meaningful ways.

Cognitive shift, the 'Aha!' moment in coaching, describes not only what is happening inside the brain but also how to recognize its occurrence and how to react and present new material. Also, we have added the important contributions that race, culture, ethnicity, and gender make to mental processing and coaching relationships. All this is based on and congruent with the foundations that were built before.