## PURPOSE

What is our higher purpose? It is our belief in schools that are communities in which self-directedness is the dominant value; that learning, not teaching, is the central aim; that developing the cognitive capacity of each inhabitant is a realized vision; that leadership is the responsibility of all the members of the learning community; that the states of mind inform the life, direction, and values of the school; and that teachers find schools as communities of support, inspiration, and individual and collective inquiry.

Most conditions of schooling hardly support these aims. According to a recent study published by the Alliance for Excellent Education, 13 percent of the nation's 3.4 million teachers move schools or leave the profession every year, costing states up to $2 billion. Researchers estimate that over 1 million teachers move in and out of schools annually, and between 40 and 50 percent quit within five years (Neason 2014).

The primary reason teachers leave is because they're dissatisfied. They leave because of isolated working conditions and inadequate support. These losses disproportionately affect high-poverty, urban, and rural schools, where teaching staffs often lack experience, thus deepening the divide between poor and wealthy students, with the most experienced teachers teaching the more privileged populations. Many teachers, though working hard and achieving success for students, become frustrated, exhausted, and have declining morale as they operate in an atmosphere of tensions due to:

- External mandates from upper echelons with insufficient time, training, and materials to teach them and the inability to influence the system
- Evaluations of teachers based upon one year's test scores irrespective of achievements in previous years
- Mismatches between test content and curriculum for which teachers had little involvement but are being held accountable
- Political wrangling about state and national programs and unfunded mandates
- Insufficient and nonuniform application and implementation of technology
- Unions, administrators, and boards adopting adversarial relations rather than working collaboratively toward collective solutions and common goals

- Teacher isolation when schools are organized around teacher separation rather than interdependence
- Fiscal woes and uncertainty of present and future financial conditions of their school district
- Extreme and challenging variation in students' abilities, developmental levels, learning styles, economic backgrounds, and cultural differences
- Inappropriate and inaccurate comparisons of other countries' educational systems regardless of teacher working conditions, culture, or political support

The effects of excessive and sustained stress on cognition, creativity, and social interaction are well documented. In barren, intellectually 'polluted' school climates, some teachers understandably grow depressed. Teachers' vivid imagination, altruism, creativity, and intellectual prowess soon succumb to the humdrum daily routines of unruly or apathetic students, irrelevant curriculum, bureaucratic mandates, impersonal surroundings, and equally disinterested co-workers. In such an environment, the likelihood that teachers will value the development of students'-and their own-intellect and imagination is marginal.

At no time has the higher purpose we state been more important. Both the world and the schools in which students seek to learn are bewilderingly multidimensional. As reported in Forbes (Rogowsky 2014), data are doubling every 12 to 18 months and the number of smartphone users will reach 6.4 billion users in a world population of about 7 billion. Cloud computing, a $41-billion industry in 2011, is projected to be a $241-billion business by 2020. Eight out of 10 children report life is too complicated. A third of working professionals experience health issues brought on by work-place stress. Political biases are becoming stronger than racial biases (Brooks 2014). In 1960, 5 percent of Republicans and Democrats said they would be displeased if their child married someone from the other party. By 2010, 49 percent of Republicans and 33 percent of Democrats said they would object. As early as 1998, Kegan wrote that the mental demands of modern life were too complex for the majority of adults. By the time this book is being read, advances in learning theory, schooling, political discourse, technology, social media, and international relations will have left even more adults behind. What is required for schools to become agile is the emergence of a new kind of leadership: leaders who passionately communicate and reinforce high aspirations for students, who ignite and focus teacher energy, who develop the leadership capacities of teachers,

who distribute informed decision making within their schools, and who, recognizing that complex (natural) systems organize themselves, foster the development of work cultures whose dominant features are selfdirectedness, collaboration, and inquiry. The principal in an agile schoolin a simpler time, called an instructional leader-is now more than that. She/he creates the conditions in which teachers, given their daily work and learning, become the leaders of instruction. The principal carries the vision, sensitivities, and skills sets of a cultural change agent and developer of adults.