## SCHOOLS ARE MESSY PLACES

Our finest moments are most likely to occur when we are feeling deeply uncomfortable, unhappy or unfulfilled. For it is only in such moments, propelled by our discomfort, that we are likely to step out of our ruts and start searching for different ways or truer answers.

-M. Scott Peck, American psychologist

Leaders have long recognized that schools are messy environments in which linear reasoning with command-and-control policies do not produce desired effects. Agile organizations dare to provoke the status quo, abandoning the principle of a single locus of control, adapting programs and processes to meet changing needs of students in a changing environment, using co-evolution, self-organizing thinking, and valuing of 'messiness' as leadership practices that are consistent with complex adaptive systems. That educators have clung to old models of governance may in part be reason for current dysfunctions in institutions of learning. Schools should not be the old-style military organizations in which leaders decide and subordinates implement. Even militaries are pivoting away from this orientation. Atkinson and Moffat (2007, xix) write, 'Agility is the gold standard for Information Age militaries. Facing uncertain futures and new sets of threats in a complex, dynamic, and challenging security environment, militaries around the world are transforming themselves, becoming more information-enabled and network-centric.' They go on to say, 'Forces must continually co-evolve in a changing environment' (40). In schools, these forces are teaching and learning networks.

Vulnerability does not sound like a leadership trait in the military, yet

the stigmatization of depression and suicide and the actual suicide rate at Fort Carson dramatically plunged when the commanding general cried in front of his top officers, recounting the pain of his son's suicide. This was unusual, 'nonmilitary' behavior, yet it launched a series of practical steps, including the creation of an embedded Behavioral Health Team that assigned a clinical physician to each brigade. This person would deploy to Afghanistan or Iraq and return with the troops when the brigade rotated home. General Mark Grahm's surprising intervention led to benefits throughout the army (Dreazen 2014). Agile leaders dare to work beyond the box of traditional leadership models.

The new identity of the 'instructional leader' in schools is to design, construct, and maintain the conditions for teachers to become highly capable in organizing, activating, and assessing learning in the classroom (Leithwood and Seashore-Lewis 2011). The mediational leader allocates resources to the cognitive development of the community-the students, teachers, administrators, parents, and classified personnel.

The 1930s conception of schools as factories in which inputs resulted in predictable outcomes has been challenged by many writers. Frymeir, as long ago as 1987, noted that what teachers do is determined more by the structure of the workplace than by experience, degrees, or training. Fullan (1993, 2001) wrote that all the good work done in schools is merely tinkering unless teachers connect with their moral purpose and develop change agentry, which requires inquiry and collaboration. Wheatley (2006), writing about organizations as systems, reminds us that it is the relationship between things that is important. Cuban (2010) commented on the tendency to apply linear logic to the work of schools and offers a useful distinction between complex and complicated systems. Complicated systems, he says, are managed by linear thinking. Even activities as intricate as brain surgery or placing a human on the moon depend on mathematical algorithms, precise maps, and dedication to detail. They require command over many moving parts, each of which responds to stimulus in predictable ways. Complex systems, however, are more like raising a child. Endless variables emerge, each interacting with and influencing the others. Put simply, such complex systems cannot be controlled, and to attempt to do so would be to deny organizations their potential fidelity, agility, and unified focus as institutions of learning.

So it is with schools and small groups within schools. Tiny events make major disturbances. A person who consistently paraphrases in a group evokes more careful speaking and listening from others. High ratios of positivity in teams evoke more inquiry than in teams with less positively

oriented statements (Losada 1999). Terms from meteorology are also used to describe complicated systems as dynamic (linear-think automobile engine ) and dynamical as a synonym for complex (nonlinear-think hurricane , which is caused by less than a one-half-degree Fahrenheit increase in temperature at the surface of the ocean) (Garmston and Wellman 2013). In Leading in a Culture of Change , Fullan (2001, 8) says 'in a nonlinear . . . world, everything exists only in relationship to everything else, and the interactions among agents in the system lead to complex, unpredictable outcomes. In this world, interactions, or relationships, among its agents are the organizing principle.'

Not only are schools in their entirety an anathema to linear management, in the past two decades or so the study of small groups has found them also to be complex and adaptive systems. They are 'driven by interactions both among and between group members and between the group and its embedding contexts' (Arrow, McGrath, and Berdahl 2000, 3). In a word, they are dynamical, with nonlinear interactions where everything affects everything else and in which energy affects operations as much, if not more, than material things like curriculum guides or schedules in the life and learning of the group. From this perspective, groups are understood as interactions between individual and collective purposes. Groups in schools in which listening is prized and practicedschools in which planning, reflecting, and problem resolving are routinely done with the skills sets and aims of Cognitive Coaching-are those that will experience success in adapting to continuing environmental changes while maintaining a sense of personal and collective efficacy.

The interdependence groomed within such schools is a leading resource for their responsiveness to change. As presented in chapter 2, social identities form by recognizing the interconnections among individuals, schools, communities, or cultures. Interdependence includes a sense of kinship that comes from a unity of being, a sense of sharing a common habitat (a class, school, or neighborhood), and a mutual bonding for common goals, shared values, and shared conceptions of being. Sergiovanni (1994) tells us that the German sociologist Ferdinand Tonnies called this way of being gemeinschaft . Gemeinschaft is a community of mental life. In some respects, Sergiovanni says, these values are still central to indigenous people in Canada and the United States. We have witnessed the peacful coexistence within such comunities in Mennonite groups in British Columbia and indiginous alliances in Bali. Gemeinschaft contrasts with gesellschaft , in which community values have been replaced by contractual ones. This is the case in most modern organizations.

Interdependent people's sense of self is enlarged from a conception of me to a sense of us . They understand that individuality is not lost as they connect with the group; only egocentricity is set aside.

Yet another set of terms has been used to describe these distinctions as technical and adaptive (Heifetz, Linsky, and Grashow 2009). Technical change requires people to apply existing skills in new ways; adaptive change calls for acquiring new tools and ways of thinking outside the current paradigm.

Table 15.1 . Linear and Nonlinear Systems Compared

Cognitive Coaching supports adaptive change in which leaders pay as much attention to energy as things. Margaret Wheatley (2006) reminds us that it is the relationship between things that is critical. She states, 'Systems influence individuals, and individuals call forth systems' (27). Garmston and Von Frank (2012) assert that it is the quality of human relationships that is the energy source that produces work in organizations. Garmston and Wellman (2013) claim that shifts in identity-to being collaborators and inquirers-is essential for schools to become adaptive. In the professional climate in which agile schools exist, teachers and others feel satisfaction by mediating the growth of others. Rather than entering such hierarchical relationships of expert and novice, their commitment is to fostering self-directed learning in students, themselves, and colleagues.

Schools and groups within schools are nonlinear systems despite a façade of command-and-control mechanisms and policy manuals for subordinates to follow. Departments, grade-level groups, committees and administrative teams are nonlinear feedback networks that are continuously involved in ongoing processes of positive and negative feedback (Stacey 1996). Paradoxically, cognitive conflict is necessary for sound decision making (Garmston and Wellman 2013) yet ratios of nearly 6 to 1 positive to negative interactions within teams distinguish highperforming groups from mid- to-low performing groups (Losada 1999). These groups also balance inquiry with advocacy. Agile schools know that despite the organizing principles from which schools were formed, schools are indeed complex and, as such, wisely attend to energy, human

relationships, and the dedication to fostering self-directedness in teachers and staff.

Leaders of agile organizations boldly work within uncertain environments, unpredictable demands, and the staff they inherit by initiating programs that develop faculty capacity. They may work from intuition and gut, as much as science, in understanding what their organizations can become. Most productively, the agile leader makes efforts toward changes in work culture because, as a second order/adaptive change, it has the greatest potential for significant and long-lasting results. They follow this with multiyear support and resource allocation. The Education Division of the Orange County Department of Education, a service center in Southern California, provides one example. In 1995 the California Department of Education launched a commission to develop a curriculum and assessment model to raise student learning, especially for students who normally fell below grade-level expectations. After exploring various models of professional improvement, Assistant Superintendent MacDonnell organized a retreat for the division's leaders to explain her vision of how Cognitive Coaching and Adaptive Schools could capacitate division members, making them even more effective in their interactions with school districts. She felt that she had been unable to communicate her personal passion for the vision in a way that staff could internalize so agreed to be coached publicly by one of the retreat trainers.

During the coaching session, she revealed her vision, passion, and concerns about serving historically underserved students. She voiced her desire for professional efficacy for all involved in creating change in how all students must be well-served, especially those identified as underserved. The audience was spellbound as they listened to MacDonnell reveal her thinking about the well-trained staff and her vision for this work. She shared that her deepest passion was to focus the division's work on student achievement. Hearing her story, many in the room experienced a breakthrough in their own thinking about the power of this vision and its potential. Many staff members had tears in their eyes by the end of the coaching session. (MacDonnell and Lindsey 2011, 35)

With her leadership, the division maintained a 20-year focus on three primary foci identified in 1995: Cognitive Coaching, Cultural Proficiency, and Adaptive Schools. MacDonnell and Lindsey write, 'this organization valued its human resources with the financial commitment to long-term,

meaningful professional development. A large part of the investment in human capital was to develop our own experts. We now have cognitive coaching agency trainers and adaptive schools associate trainers' (2011, 38). We visited the division several years after MacDonnell's retirement and discovered that norms, skills sets, and values initiated under her leadership are intact.

In the agile schools we've witnessed, similar achievements in transformed work cultures occur. Cognitive Coaching is introduced not as another professional development activity but becomes a sustaining part of the organization. Regular refreshment and extended learning sessions are provided. Orientation is planned for new faculty members. Internal leaders and directors of ongoing professional development are established. We have seen this evolve in Jefferson County Schools in Colorado, Fairfax County Schools in Virginia, the Dar es Salam School in Tanzania, and the international school in Kuala Lumpur. Agile schools often integrate programs that support group development such as Adaptive Schools (Garmston and Wellman 2013) and Habits of Mind for students (Costa and Kallick 2008). Teachers teach students the skills sets of Cognitive Coaching and apply them to student projects like senior mentoring projects for incoming freshman.

It has been noted that schools are often fragmented with too many initiatives bearing little relationship to one another. In agile schools, leaders help teachers relate common principles across existing programs and use tenets of Cognitive Coaching as one set of criteria for new adoptions. Many of the Cognitive Coaching skills sets used in coaching are also applicable to teaching. Teachers employ mediative questioning in classrooms, paraphrasing with groups and individual conferences with student and parents. Learned elements of rapport are essential to maximize the parent-teacher relationship, and in many schools teachers introduce students to paraphrasing, posing questions and concepts of efficacy and craftsman-ship. Overheard in a kindergarten class was a student saying, 'Please, teacher, I didn't understand. Can you paraphrase that?'

In Hayward, California, ninth-grade students learn how to peer coach other students using skills sets from Cognitive Coaching. This program equips students with metacognitive tools to support their growth in their academic and personal lives. In an anonymous survey, 88 percent of students agreed that through peer coaching they 'have learned skills that will help me be successful' and that 'peer coaching has improved my ability to communicate with others' (Barbosa-Gonzales 2009).

In schools that are also agile organizations, collective identities have

morphed into being teaching organizations in which development of each individual within the organization is the primary aim. Like the bricklayer when asked to explain his job reported that he was building a cathedral, teachers in agile organizations see their mission as the full development of human potential in the students with whom they work. Like a mission to end human suffering, such grand aspirations inspire, focus, and energize educators. Such passion stands up against restrictive district policies.

In East Los Angles, a principal who was told she was referring too many children for special services responded, 'So your directions to me are to abandon the welfare of a percentage of our kids . . . do I have that right?' The directive withered in the face of this stance. Mission, we are told by Robert Dilts, is even a greater determinant of what people do than identity, when that mission is held as sacred and almost a spiritual aim (Dilts 2014).

One Michigan school principal stated:

Every building has had coaching conversations in front of the school board. Our board presentations used to be a dog-and-pony show where the buildings were showing off the latest and greatest. Now it is a conversation reflecting on our practice. In fact, it has been so powerful, one teacher did a coaching conversation involving representatives from the district and also the school board members about the superintendent's first year. Once you get into it, everybody sees the power in it. We have a superintendent who trusts us and developed that trust across the district to make it work. He knew it would take time and built in the time. It's not a matter that we just said 'Cognitive Coaching is going to be embedded in our culture'; we made the commitment and we had a leader who was willing to say this is what it's going to take.