## A HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE ON COGNITIVE COACHING

Cognitive Coaching has its source in the authors' professional experiences. We both began our educational careers in the late 1950s, a time of great ferment in American education. In the early 1970s, Nabuo Watanabe, then director of Curriculum Services of the Office of the Contra Costa County Superintendent of Schools, convened a group of California educators to develop a strategy for helping school administrators understand and apply humanistic principles of teacher evaluation. Art was a member of that group. Using the clinical supervision model of Cogan and Goldhammer, the group outlined the basic structure of the pre- and post-conference. They also identified three goals of evaluation: trust, learning, and autonomy. These goals and processes foreshadowed key concepts in Cognitive Coaching.

At about the same time, Bob was a consultant and principal for the Arabian American Oil Company Schools in Saudi Arabia. He was implementing a systemwide innovation in computer-assisted individualized instruction that cast the teacher in the roles of facilitator and mediator for student learning. Simultaneously, he and his colleagues were applying the pioneer work in clinical supervision developed by Cogan, Goldhammer, and Anderson at the Harvard Graduate School of Education. Additionally, Bob was teaching communication courses in Parent and Teacher Effectiveness Training, developed by psychologist Thomas Gordon, a forerunner to some of the nonjudgmental verbal skills found in Cognitive Coaching today.

In his early career, Art was highly influenced by leaders in education and cognitive development. Art's doctoral work at the University of California, Berkeley, emphasized curriculum, instruction, and psychology. He took courses based on curriculum and instructional theories of Hilda Taba, Jerome Bruner, and Reuven Feuerstein. Bob's early pedagogical mentors included an exceptional group of professors at San Francisco State University, Santa Rosa Center, who operated as an interdisciplinary team, and the national leaders in humanistic psychology, including Carl Rogers, Fritz Perls, and Abraham Maslow. Studies with Caleb Gattegno from the University of London and J. Richard Suchman, father of inquiry training, informed his approaches to teaching and learning.

After 20 years in the roles of teacher, principal, director of instruction,

and acting superintendent, Bob completed a doctorate at the University of Southern California with an emphasis on educational administration, sociology, and staff development. About the same time that the emphases of cognition, instruction, and supervision were beginning to coalesce for Art, Bob was piecing together principles of counseling practices and strategies of group dynamics for school improvement. He joined the faculty at California State University as professor of educational administration, where he taught courses in curriculum development, school improvement, supervision, and neurolinguistics. Art was also teaching at California State University, and he and Bob were assigned to the same office. There they developed the first formal expression of Cognitive Coaching, and that December tested their ideas with staff developers at a statewide conference. The enthusiastic reception led to further conceptual work and publications, as well as invitations to present six-day 'trainings' to educators.

By the summer of 1985, interest in Cognitive Coaching sparked formation of the Institute for Intelligent Behavior, an association of persons dedicated to enabling educational and corporate agencies to support their members' growth toward the five high-performance states of mind articulated by the authors. Seven senior associates helped refine and provide seminar programs in Cognitive Coaching to interested school districts and private-sector organizations throughout North America and internationally.

As more and more people and agencies became intrigued with the power of Cognitive Coaching, numerous requests were received for a book to help explain Cognitive Coaching. In 1994, the first edition of Cognitive Coaching: A Foundation for Renaissance Schools was published. The book came to be used as a basic text in university courses and as a reference to accompany the burgeoning seminars and leadership training.

To date, well over 200 organizational leaders have been trained to serve as resources to their own educational agencies to infuse, support, and study the effects of implementing the skills, maps, and principles of Cognitive Coaching. Additionally, more than 50 consultants have been trained to provide Foundation Seminars to educational organizations such as schools, districts, departments of education, and professional organizations as well as to business and corporate agencies.

Coordinated by Carolee Hayes and Jane Ellison, the Center for Cognitive Coaching was established in 2000 to provide leadership training and to serve as a resource to schools and districts desiring Cognitive Coaching services, information, and products.

In the 20 years since the first book was published, there have been many changes in education. Pedagogical and political ferment has been the norm in education, yet interest in and the practice of Cognitive Coaching has been sustained and is growing.

Against this background of seesawing political and policy ferment has been the steady progress in unlocking the secrets of the mind's role in learning; much of the findings supported the practices of Cognitive Coaching, which may explain, at least in part, the sustaining presence of this model. It was not until the end of 1970 that that term cognitive neuroscience entered the lexicon, coined by George Miller (of the '7 plus or minus 2' memory fame) and Michael Gazzaniga. Neuroscience itself was not established as a unified discipline until 1971 and it was very late in the 20th century that technologies like transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) became mainstays in understanding brain functioning. Cognitive neuroscience addresses questions of how psychological functions are affected by neural circuitry.

Today integrative neuroscience attempts to consolidate data in databases and form unified descriptive models from various fields and scales: biology, psychology, anatomy, and clinical practice (Squire 2009).

In 2013, in recognition of the common focus of thinking and expanding human potential individually and in groups, Carolee Hayes and Jane Ellison, directors of the Center for Cognitive Coaching, and Michael Dolcemascolo and Carolyn McKanders, directors of the Center for Adaptive Schools, coalesced to form Thinking Collaborative, housing both Cognitive Coaching and Adaptive Schools study, leadership development, and seminars.

With the current emphasis on standards for students, teachers, and administrators; with the political desire for 'high-stakes accountability'; and with increased knowledge about human learning and emphasis on 21st-century skills, it is time for a reexamination of the ideals, premises, and practices of Cognitive Coaching and how new understandings are influencing the direction of this work. The major purposes of this book, therefore, are to acquaint new readers with the promises Cognitive Coaching provides and to reaffirm and extend knowledge about Cognitive Coaching practices for readers visiting this territory again. All of this is offered toward the ultimate goal of developing teachers and students as self-directed learners capable of coping with and living productively and harmoniously in an ambiguous, technological, and global future.