## About the Authors

Arthur L. Costa , EdD, is an emeritus professor of education at California State University, Sacramento. He is cofounder of the Institute for Habits of Mind and cofounder of the Center for Cognitive Coaching. He served as a classroom teacher, a curriculum consultant, and an assistant superintendent for instruction, and as the director of educational programs for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. He has made presentations and conducted workshops in all 50 states as well as on six of the seven continents

Art has written and edited numerous books, including The School as a Home for the Mind , Techniques for Teaching Thinking (with Larry Lowery), and Cognitive Coaching (with Bob Garmston). He is editor of Developing Minds: A Resource Book for Teaching Thinking , and co-editor (with Rosemarie Liebman) of the Process as Content Trilogy: Habits of Mind Learning and Leading with Habits of Mind , , and Habits of Mind across the Curriculum (both with Bena Kallick). He is co-author of Assessment Strategies for Self-Directed Learning (with Bena Kallick), Cognitive Capital: Investing in Teacher Quality (with Bob Garmston and Diane Zimmerman), The Power of the Social Brain (with Pat Wilson O'Leary), and Dispositions: Reframing Teaching and Learning (with Bena Kallick). His books have been translated into Arabic, Chinese, Italian, Spanish, and Dutch.

Active in many professional organizations, Art served as president of the California Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development and was the national president of the Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development from 1988 to 1989. He was the recipient of the prestigious Lifetime Achievement Award from the National Urban Alliance in 2010.

Robert J. Garmston , EdD, is an emeritus professor of education at

California State University, Sacramento, and co-developer of Cognitive Coaching with Dr. Art Costa. Formerly a classroom teacher, principal, director of instruction, and acting superintendent, he works as an educational consultant and is director of Facilitation Associates, a consulting firm specializing in leadership, learning, and personal and organizational development. He is co-developer and founder of the Center for Adaptive Schools with Bruce Wellman, now organized under the heading of Thinking Collaborative Cognitive Coaching and Habits of Mind. The Center for Adaptive Schools

(http://www.thinkingcollaborative.com), representing its relationship to develops organizational capacity for self-directed, sustainable improvement in student learning. He has made presentations and conducted workshops for teachers, administrators, and staff developers throughout the United States as well as in Canada, Africa, Asia, Australia, Europe, China, and the Middle East.

Bob has written and co-authored a number of books, including Cognitive Coaching: A Foundation for Renaissance Schools with Art Costa, How to Make Presentations That Teach and Transform , and A Presenter's Fieldbook: A Practical Guide . In 1999, the National Staff Development Council (NSDC) selected The Adaptive School: A Sourcebook for Developing Collaborative Groups as book of the year. In that same year, Bob was recognized by NSDC for his contributions to staff development. Second editions of the Presenter's Fieldbook and Adaptive Schools were published in 2005 and 2009. His recent publications include I Don't Do That Any More: A Memoir of Awakening and Resilience (2011), Unlocking Group Potential for Improving Schools (2012), and Lemons to Lemonade: Resolving Problems in Meetings, Workshops and PLCs (2013). His books have been translated into Arabic, Dutch, Hebrew, and Italian.

In addition to educational clients, he has worked with diverse groups including police officers, probation officers, court and justice systems, utilities districts, the U.S. Air Force, and the World Health Organization.