## FOUNDATIONS OF COGNITIVE COACHING

Humanistic psychological orientations such as empathy, unconditional positive regard, and personal congruence guide the coach's work with relationship building. Certain neurolinguistic principles (Zoller and Landry 2010) are also applied to achieve rapport and access thinking. Rapport is essential to mediate cognitive processes, affecting brain chemistry and access to the neocortex. Thus, the Cognitive Coaching model links physiology and cognition, which increases the importance of deep relationship skills and nuance within interactions. Rapport is an important tool for building and maintaining trust in the moment, particularly when there is tension, miscommunication, or anticipated difficulty.

Cognitive Coaches are always alert to in-the-moment opportunities. Thus, they draw upon their tools, maps, and capabilities in many different situations. These include brief corridor conversations, casual planning conversations, more structured reflecting and problem-solving conversations, and formal planning or reflecting conversations, built around the observation of a lesson or event. For example, as two teachers are on the way to their classrooms, one asks, 'How was the conference that you went to last week?' The response is, 'It was very interesting.'

The first teacher asks, 'So what was it about the conference that interested you?' Her colleague responds, 'I found many practical strategies that I could use.' The first teacher then asks, 'So as you anticipate your classes this week, what insights do you plan to apply?'