## HISTORICAL BACKGROUND OF THE MODEL

In the late 1960s, Morris Cogan, Robert Goldhammer, Robert Anderson, and a group of supervisors working in Harvard's master of arts in teaching program found that traditional supervision placed the supervisor in an 'expert' role superior to that of the teacher. Supervisors told the teacher what should be changed and how to do it. Supervisors offered solutions to problems that concerned them, which were not necessarily the problems that concerned teachers. All efforts to change the conference style in which the supervisor did the talking and the teacher did the listening had failed. The work of Cogan and his colleagues on this dilemma was the foundation for the clinical supervision model, and it is important to understand some of Cogan's work to appreciate the distinctive attributes of Cognitive Coaching.

Cogan (1973) envisioned the purpose of clinical supervision as the development of a professionally responsible teacher who is analytical of his own performance, open to help from others, and self-directing. Clinical supervision demanded a role change in which the teacher and the supervisor worked as colleagues, respecting each other's contributions. The intent of the process was to cultivate teacher self-appraisal, selfdirection, and self-supervision. Cogan's clinical supervision was conceived as a cyclic, eight-phase process organized around planning and conferring with a teacher before instruction, observing the lesson itself, and conducting a follow-up conversation after the lesson. Cogan and his colleagues believed that the act of teaching is a collection of behaviors that can be understood and controlled. These behaviors can be observed singly and in interaction. Instructional improvement could be achieved by changing or modifying these instructional behaviors.

Cognitive Coaching also draws on the model of the mediated learning experience developed by the Israeli psychologist Reuven Feuerstein et al. (2015) in which the teacher or coach has the intention of modifying a colleague's cognitive capacity to modify himself or herself.

Cognitive Coaching is a modern expression of these orientations, built on the foundation laid by Cogan and Goldhammer. There are, however, significant departures. Although the traditional model of clinical supervision addresses overt teaching behaviors, we believe that these behaviors are the product and artifacts of inner thought processes and intellectual functions.

The authors and a powerful team of associates developed Cognitive Coaching in 1984. Over the years, the forms and uses of Cognitive Coaching have evolved to include applications in the business and corporate world, peer coaching, mentor services for teachers and administrators, peer assistance and review programs, parent-teacher conferences, instructional coaches, and classrooms with students of all ages.

- Cognitive Coaching is based upon four assumptions: (1) the nonroutine and complex nature of teaching requires constant contextual decision making; (2) all behavior is directed by our individual and subjective perceptions; (3) to skillfully change behavior requires a change in perception; and (4) effective coaching mediates the perceptual changes and capacities for reasoning and decision making that promote behavioral changes toward more effective practice.
- The purpose of supervision is to increase the capacity for selfmodification (Garmston, Lipton, and Kaiser 1998). Changing the overt behaviors of instruction requires the alteration and rearrangement of inner, invisible cognitive processes. This relates to the application of specific knowledge about teacher cognition, neurosciences related to conversations, and specifically coaching and psycholinguistics.

The diagram of a tree and its roots in figure 1.1 displays the relationships and connections of the various philosophical, psychological, physiological, neuroscientific, and historical concepts on which Cognitive Coaching is based.