## Consulting

To consult is to 'inform regarding processes and protocols, advise based on well-developed expertise, or advocate for particular choices and actions' (Lipton and Wellman 2011, 20). In most school districts, skillful teachers have been designated as consultants, mentors, or peer coaches. These role titles do not necessarily describe how they do their work, for they may employ consulting, collaborating, and coaching to achieve their aims. Mentoring in the educational setting is usually thought of as a relationship between a beginning teacher and a more experienced colleague; additionally, experienced principals sometimes mentor new principals.

Consultants serve as information specialists about or advocates for content or processes based upon their greater experience, broader knowledge, and wider repertoire. A supporting teacher, working as a consultant, provides technical information to a more novice teacher or to peers about the content or skills being taught, the curriculum, teaching strategies, and child growth and development. As a process advocate, a consultant informs a teacher about alternative strategies and consequences associated with different choices of methodology and content. For beginning teachers, a consultant may also provide information about school policies, assessments, procedures for obtaining special resources, protocols for parent conferences, and the like.

Consulting skills include clarifying goals, modeling expert thinking and problem-solving processes, providing data, drawing on research about best practices, making suggestions based on experience, offering advice, and advocating. The consultant is always working to support the teacher in becoming self-directed and is working from an intention of gradual release.

To be successful, the consultant must have permission from the teacher to consult, which requires a high degree of credibility and trust. The consultant also must hold commonly defined goals and the client's desired outcomes in mind.

The true test of a consulting relationship is the transfer of skills, behaviors, and increased 'coachability' over time. The support person who needs to be needed can trap the teacher and him/herself into a dependency relationship. Likewise, the support person whose identity is primarily about being an expert may also trap him/herself into a dependency relationship with the teacher. Within the context of Cognitive Coaching, effective consulting functions consistently lead toward the ultimate goal of self-directedness.