## Why Coaching?

In a time when many schools are pressed for time and money along with implementation of federal and state mandates, why is coaching so important? We have identified several compelling reasons.

1. Teachers need and want support. Earlier studies tracked the implementation of state legislative mandates in 26 national sites. Among the most significant findings was the importance of the support teacher. A cluster of studies found the support teacher-mentor to be the most powerful and cost-effective intervention in induction programs (Oja and Reiman 1998). More recently it was found that teachers with a high level of engagement in a large-scale mentoring program (California Formative Assessment and Support System for Teachers) improved both teaching practices and student achievement, producing an effect size equivalent to half a year's growth (Thompson, Goe, Paek, and Ponte 2004). Schools and classrooms today are busy, active places where teachers and students are pressured by high-stakes testing to teach and learn faster and to be held accountable for demonstrating to others their achievement of specified standards and mastery of rigorous, complex content. For that reason, classrooms are much more present- and future-oriented systems than they were in the past. Often it is easier to discard what has happened and simply move on.

Increasing evidence supports the link between student learning and staff learning. This means that as staff members learn and improve practices, the students benefit and show learning increases (Yoon, Duncan, Lee, Scarloss, and Shapley 2007). Cognitive Coaching requires a deliberate pause, a purposeful slowing down of this fast-paced life for contemplation and reflection. Coaching serves as a foundation for continuous learning by mediating another's capacity to reflect before, during, and after practice. Kahn (1992) emphasized the importance of 'psychological presence' as a requisite for individual learning and high-quality performance.

2. Cognitive Coaching enhances the intellectual capacities of teachers, which in turn produces greater intellectual achievement in students. Professional development is a better predictor than age when measuring growth in adult cognitive and conceptual development. Research shows

that teachers with higher conceptual levels are more adaptive and flexible in their teaching styles, and they have a greater ability to empathize, to symbolize human experience, and to act in accordance with a disciplined commitment to human values. These teachers choose new practices when classroom problems appear, vary their use of instructional strategies, elicit more conceptual responses from students (Hunt 1980), give more corrective and positive feedback to students, and produce higher-achieving students who are more cooperative and involved in their work (Calhoun 1985).

Witherall and Erickson (1978) found that teachers at the highest levels of ego development demonstrated greater complexity and commitment to the individual student; greater generation and use of data in teaching; and greater understanding of practices related to rules, authority, and moral development than their counterparts. Teachers at higher stages of intellectual functioning demonstrate more flexibility, toleration for stress, and adaptability. They take multiple perspectives, use a variety of coping behaviors, and draw from a broader repertoire of teaching models (Hunt 1977-1978). High-concept teachers are more effective with a wider range of students, including students from diverse cultural backgrounds.

We know that adults continue to move through stages of cognitive, conceptual, and ego development and that their developmental levels have a direct relationship to student behavior and student performance. Supportive organizations with a norm for growth and change promote increased levels of intellectual, social, moral, and ego states for members. The complex challenge for coaches, of course, is to understand the diverse stages in which each staff member is currently operating; to assist people in understanding their own and others' differences and stages of development; to accept staff members at their present moral, social, cognitive, and ego state; and to act in a nonjudgmental manner.

3. Few educational innovations achieve their full impact without a coaching component. Conventional approaches to staff developmentworkshops, lectures, and demonstrations-show little evidence of transfer to ongoing classroom practice. Several seminal studies by Bruce Joyce and Beverly Showers (2002) reveal that the level of classroom application remains very low even after high-quality training that integrates theory and demonstration. When staff development includes time for practice and nonjudgmental feedback and when the curriculum is adapted for the innovation, the implementation is higher. When staff development includes coaching in the training design, however, the level of application increases greatly. With periodic review of both the teaching model and the

coaching skills-and with continued coaching-classroom application of innovations remains very high.

- 4. Feedback is the energy source of goal accomplishment, growth, and self-renewal (Hattie 2003, 7; Costa and Kallick 2008, 103). However, feedback will improve practice only when it is given in a skillful way. Research by Carol Sanford (2011) has shown that value judgments or advice from others reduce the capacity for accurate self-assessment. Feedback that is data driven, value free, necessary, requested, and relevant, however, activates self-evaluation, self-analysis, and self-modification (Wiggins 2014).
- 5. Beginning teachers need mentors who employ Cognitive Coaching. Those entering a new profession need help to get through the struggles and quandaries of their first years. Cognitive Coaching offers a valuable initiation into the education profession by providing a model of intellectual engagement and learning that promotes self-directed learning. Cognitive Coaching also provides a leadership identity that endures in the minds of new teachers as they assume leadership roles throughout the organization. After three or four years of service, beginning teachers mentored with Cognitive Coaching in California schools gradually assumed significant teacher-leader roles (Riley 2000). Teachers often report the value of coaching over consulting. A fourth-year Arizona teacher in a Cognitive Coaching Seminar explained that she had asked for and received a great deal of consulting in her first years of teaching. She added that classroom practice in her fourth year, however, is based on thinking about the ideas she received from Cognitive Coaching (Ellison 2010).
- 6. Working effectively as a team member requires coaching. A harmonious collegial effort needs coordination. Consider a symphony orchestra. Its members are diversely talented individuals: an outstanding pianist, a virtuoso violinist, or an exquisite cellist. The musicians play, rehearse together, and come to a common vision of the entire score. Each musician understands how the part he or she plays contributes to the whole. They do not all play at the same time, but they do support each other in a coordinated effort. Together, they work diligently toward a common goal: producing beautiful music.

Likewise, each member of a school staff is an extremely talented professional. Together, they work to produce a positive learning environment, challenging educational experiences, and self-actualized students. In the same way, members of the school community should support each other in creating and achieving the organization's vision. Teachers neither teach the same subjects at the same time nor do they

approach them in the same way. Cognitive Coaching provides a safe format for professional dialogue and develops the skills for reflection on practice, both of which are necessary for productive collaboration (Costa and O'Leary 2013).

- 7. Coaching develops positive interpersonal relationships that are the energy sources for adaptive school cultures and productive organizations. The pattern of adult interactions in a school strongly influences the climate of the learning environment and the instructional outcomes for students. Integral to the Cognitive Coaching model is the recognition that human beings operate with a rich variety of cultural, personal, and cognitive style differences that can be resources for learning. Cognitive Coaching builds a knowledge of and appreciation for diversity. It also provides frameworks, skills, and tools for coaches to work with other adults and students in open and resourceful ways. Cognitive Coaching promotes cohesive school cultures in which norms of experimentation and open, honest communication enable everyone to work together in healthy, respectful ways.

Work by Susan Rosenholtz, Karen Seashore Louis, Milbrey McLaughlin, and others document that workplace culture (i.e., the shared values, quality of relationships, and collaborative norms of the workplace) has a greater influence on what people do than the knowledge, skills, or personal histories of either workers or supervisors (Garmston and Lipton 1998). Research by Gregory Moncada (1998) revealed that conversation alters the nature of the social construction of reality. His work also revealed that change in schools is determined less by environmental influences than by modifications in the social construction of reality brought about by conversation.

8. Coaching supports and makes more successful school renewal programs. Numerous organizations that have adopted Cognitive Coaching find that self-directed learning becomes central to the organization's aims; curriculum standards become broadened and organized around selfdirected learning; and evaluation of teachers, students, and organizational effectiveness changes from performance reviews to mechanisms for continuous spirals of growth and learning. Schools that have adopted Cognitive Coaching have skills and values with which to accelerate growth into collaborative learning communities. Furthermore, reflection becomes habituated throughout the organization (York-Barr, Sommers, Ghere, and Montie 2001).

Schools and agencies that have adopted Cognitive Coaching have begun to profit from its effects not only in the United States but also

increasingly throughout the world. Ultimately, we believe, Cognitive Coaching will significantly contribute to the creation of agile schools worldwide. Principles and examples of an agile organization are explored in chapter 15.