## Identity

Where Cognitive Coaching provides a cognitive framework for our work as educators, the tools of Cultural Proficiency provide a moral framework. The culturally proficient educator recognizes that the disparities that exist among demographic groups are human-made and human-maintained. Recognizing these human-made disparities, the culturally proficient educator sees it as her moral obligation to create and influence change both within herself and her school (Lindsey, Martinez, and Lindsey 2007, 34).

I dentity is the mental model each of us constructs of who we are as a unique self. This is an important concept because identity informs decisions and behaviors. The most sustainable way to change behaviors is to change identity. The self, writes neuroscientist Antonio Damasio, is fluid. It is not a thing; rather, it is a process (Damasio 2010). One's identity is in a constant and imperceptible gradual state of transformation. We create meaning from our interactions with others and with the environment. Identity emerges from the web of those interactions. It is not only how I see myself, but also the meanings I make from how others see me as a result of my interactions over time. There is no identity in isolation. In A Simpler Way , Wheatley and Kellner-Rogers observe,

Every living thing acts to develop and preserve itself. Identity is the filter that every organism or system uses to make sense of the world. New information, new relationships, changing environments-all are interpreted through a sense of self. This tendency toward self-creation is so strong that it creates a seeming paradox. An organism will change to maintain its identity. (1999, 14)

In this chapter, we explain three forms of identity and how identity is formed. We explore a conceptual model related to changing identity and the responsive affects in other domains of human learning. We relate all this to the identity of a Cognitive Coach as a mediator of another's journey in self-directed learning.