## THREE FORMS OF IDENTITY

Many theorists, cognitive and humanistic psychologists, biologists, anthropologists, and systems theorists have studied the development and effects of identity. Among these are Eric Erickson, Gregory Bateson, Robert Dilts, Milton Ericson, Carol Dweck, William James, Antonio Damasio, Abraham Maslow, Morris Rosenberg, and Oliver Sacks. Three ways of thinking about identity emerge: personal, social, and role identity.

Personal identity is a person's conception and expression of his/her individuality or group affiliations. Cognitive Coaching concerns itself with one's individuality and how that sense shapes and informs perceptions, values, beliefs, and behaviors. Psychologists refer to this as personal identity or autobiographical self , in which the self interacts with others and in which the relationships between self and others are organized in fairly stable representations over time (Damasio 2010). The thoughts, feelings, inferences, and interpretations of the experiences available to the autobiographical self constitute one's identity. Identity is the story we tell ourselves of who we are.

A second form is social identities in which a person has not one but several selves that correspond to group identifications such as ethnicity, passport country, age cohort, gender, sexual orientation, and political associations. This is a portion of self-concept related to being a member of a relevant social group. One might hold multiple social identities as being an Asian American Democrat with membership in the Sierra Club. Social identities can influence one's behavior, especially when with a group with which one is identifying.

Finally , role identity is concerned with the tendency for human behaviors to form characteristic patterns in different contexts (Biddle 2000). Role identity is relational since people typically interact with each other via their own role identities. At different times, in our role identities, we are husband or wife, grandchild or sibling, boss or employee, expert or student, depending on both the context in which we find ourselves and the

other persons with whom we interact. These can be said to be 'role identities,' temporary and situational personas. The archetype of each of these roles carries certain presuppositions, orientations, and goals, which are manifested verbally and with our entire being. How we carry out each role is influenced by the identity we have developed for ourselves.

What begins as role identity might grow to be personal identity ( autobiographical self ) in which the beliefs and behaviors associated with this identity would be active in a multitude of relationships. This has been found to be true for those who develop a sense of self as mediator, the identity associated with being a Cognitive Coach. A mediator's mission is fostering a person's cognitive capacity for excellence as individuals and as members of a community. A mediator is a co-learner, engaging another person with the intent of transforming his/her capacities to become more self-directed: self-managing, self-monitoring, and self-modifying.