## SYSTEMS OF LEARNING

Anthropologist and cyberneticist Gregory Bateson (1972) first formulated the notion of relating systems of learning to human growth. He identified different and complementary systems of change, each developed through different systems of learning. Envisioning them as ordered on a ladder, he found that higher levels influence changes on lower levels, something like a cascade effect. Changes brought about on the lower levels are not always lasting, nor are they a guarantee that they will affect the higher ones. So it is economical to make a greater effort for change at the higher levels, without neglecting, Bateson says, to intervene at the other levels as well. And if possible, intervene at all of the levels, thereby aligning them and making a comprehensive intervention throughout the system. Bateson's system of learning is described in the four points below.

- 1.  Any system of activity is a subsystem embedded inside another system. This system is also embedded in an even larger system and so on.
- 2.  Learning in one subsystem produces a type of learning relative to the system in which you are operating.
- 3.  The effect of each level of learning is to organize and control the information on the level below it.
- 4.  Learning something on an upper level will change things on lower levels, but learning something on a lower level may or may not inform and influence levels above it.

Our reading of Bateson (1972, 2000), Tosey on Bateson (2006), and Dilts (1994, 2003, 2014) and work with thousands of people in seminars over a 30-year period lead us to place identity in a dominant position in a system of human learning. Thus identity informs and influences one's values and beliefs, capabilities or mental maps and process, and behaviors, the use of which are conditioned by the environment. So the Cognitive Coach, having an identity as mediator, forms and applies values (fostering the intellectual development of others), beliefs (resources for growth lie within a person being coached), capabilities (mental maps to guide conversations and knowing when and how to use certain skills), and finally the application of coaching behaviors (developing rapport, pausing, paraphrasing, posing questions), the use of which is conditioned by environment.

The overarching orientation guiding Cognitive Coaching work is the movement from a person's present state to a desired state. The work of Robert Dilts (2014) aligns with this. He suggests that ultimately the goal of personal coaching is to be deeply connected with ourselves and to live from a place of centeredness, presence, and fullness. We agree. Dilts originally conceived these elements as having a cascading affect, each higher level affecting the one below it.

When you were a child, you thought of yourself in certain ways. As an adult, you think of yourself differently. The root of your identity comes from your genetics, culture, and your experiences and the meaning you make of them. Your identity will change over time. It is important to know that you can modify yourself to be more in alignment with who you want to be.