## Environment

This can be summarized by 'where, when, and with whom.' It represents the medium or the context in which we operate, in other words 'what is perceived outside me,' for example, work, home, social relationships, as well as political and economic contexts. Environment can be either tangible, as in things and places, or intangible, as in morale within a place. Environment influences what people do. School morale has a more than minor liberating or depressing effect on teacher thinking, behaviors, and indeed identity (Frymeir 1987; Seashore-Lewis, Marks, and Kruse 1996; Hoy, Sweetland, and Smith 2002). Modifying the environment can allow for behavioral change such as providing time and space for coaching.

Each coachee is a unique product of his/her culture, experiences, concepts, interactions, learnings, perceptions, values, skills, and behaviors. These are further affected by the school culture in which she/he works. Because each coachee brings his/her identity to interactions, the coaching process may be viewed as a collaborative interaction of identities. Each brings his/her unique perceptions into play during the dialogue. If the organizational identity is one of direct and command, it will provide the coachee with limited support for independent thought. In some situations people may be motivated to behave in ways that express or support the organization's identity rather than their own (Ellemers, De Gilder, and Haslam 2004). So when and where a Cognitive Coach uses his/her skills determines the opportunities as well as constraints.

As we shall see, all models are incomplete, including ones relating identity to other aspects of human functioning. Informed by Bateson's work (1972), Robert Dilts developed a stepladder model of learning in which elements higher on the ladder affected those below. While we have found great value in applying Dilts's model to Cognitive Coaching practices, we are recognizing new application possibilities from recent examinations of his work, including his own observations of his more recent model (Dilts 2014).