## IDENTITY CHANGES

Earlier in his career, Bob's son, Kevin, was a teacher coaching student athletics and playing in several adult teams until the birth of his son. Remarkably, at his birth, a transformation occurred. Looking down into his

son's face for the first time, Kevin suddenly was a father. In a sense this experience redefined his identity. Changes in values and beliefs consistent with parenthood emerged. He sought and developed the capabilities for behaviors related to fathering a young child. Sports activities dropped away; time with his son became the dominant interest in his life.

Other examples of identity conversions are found in spiritual and addiction literature. A review of spiritual writings report conversion experiences in which a 'transformed self is achieved' either suddenly or gradually (Schwartz 2000, 5). In his review, Schwartz notes that the change in self is often 'radical' with a new centering of interest, concern, and behaviors. Similarly, in studies of addiction, Sremac and Ganzevoort (2013) draw on 31 autobiographies in which drug addicts develop and sustain a sense of new identity. From this new self they create meaning from conflicting life experiences. Sremak and Ganzevoort report that the subjects they studied literally recreated their identities. They did so with a narrative process in which the construction and continuous reconstruction of a story of the self occurs. AA recoveries, too, report this process. The third of the 12 steps in Alcoholics Anonymous reads, 'We made a decision to turn our will and our lives over to the care of God as we understood Him.'

These reports are consistent with Damasio's (2010) view of identity being a work in progress. Identity change in these cases comes from personal narrative in which the recovering addict or alcoholic tells stories about self, often employing religious terms. This process runs concurrently with behavior changes, including abstinence and the practice of new socially useful behaviors. The appearance of spirituality in these cases is also consistent with Dilts's perception, that while identity is a prime mover of the other elements of learning, spirituality can inform identity. According to Dilts and McDonald (1997), Spirit is the pattern that connects everything together as a kind of larger mind of which individuals are but a subsystem. Manifestations of this Spirit, they believe, appear as wisdom, vision, mission, and healing. They are the consequence of acknowledging and bringing Spirit more into one's life and actions. Fruits of the Spirit, they say-such as love, compassion, joy, and peace-are the generative and transformative results of being more in harmony with what Einstein called God's thoughts.

At the spiritual level are subjective experiences of being part of a larger system. It is awakening to this greater context that gives our lives meaning and purpose. Anthropologist and systems theorist Gregory Bateson described it as the awareness of the pattern that connects all things together

into a larger whole. This awareness reaches beyond ourselves as individuals (Tognetti 2002).