## AVENUES TO CHANGE

As Damasio (2010) reminds us, identity is always a moving target. While our autobiographical self, or ego, now thought to be physically located deep in the brain and called the default mode network (Pollan 2015), may not notice gradual mutations, environments and experiences affect us. Many routes can lead to identity alterations. Early in his career, one of the authors was fascinated as he learned from notable figures in psychology. These luminaries-Carl Rogers, Fritz Perls, and Wilson Van Dusen, who at the time was chief psychologist at Mendocino State Hospital in California-elicited internal resources for learning. He witnessed similar orientations as he studied with two exceptional educators: Richard Suchman, who originated Inquiry Training, and Caleb Gattegno, who developed the reading program Words in Color and mathematics

applications with Cuisenaire Rods. For this author, experience prompted value shifts that inflamed a desire to mediate learning for others in ways these notables had done. Study and practice followed.

Just as the mind is a belief-validating mechanism (Shermer 2011), the brain also seeks recognition and reinforcement of identity. Consider the formation of beliefs. Touching a hot stove is significantly painful and traumatic enough that in a one-experience event the belief is formed that touching stoves can be painful and dangerous. The mind, as a beliefvalidating mechanism then seeks confirming information from other sources. In another process, children, dependent on others, may accept what adults tell them. In yet another, repeated experiences of observing children from the tenements struggle in learning school subjects, one might form the belief that tenements children cannot learn. Regardless of the source, a one-time event (such as accepting what an authority figure says) or repeated experiences in which one forms generalizations, the next step is that the brain cannot help itself from what Shermer calls patternicity . This is the search for validation in patterns of both meaningful and meaningless data. Because the brain must connect the dots, it then infuses the patterns with meaning, intention, and agency.