## CONCLUSION

In this chapter, three categories of identity have been explored: role identity, say of boss, parent, sibling, or friend; social identity in which we relate ourselves to relevant groups, say, midwestern white Republican hunter; and personal identity, which is the focus of development in Cognitive Coaching Communicating from any role or personal orientations casts us into a response loop with others. For example, if I sound, feel, and look like a parent to you, you are likely to respond to me as a child (Wheatley and Kellner-Rogers 1999). Assuming the stance of the expert establishes one's responsibility to share one's greater knowledge and experience and to help others develop correct and appropriate performance. The friend values the relationship and will be loath to jeopardize it. The boss, in the traditional sense, wants compliance and feels responsible for the other person's success or failure. The mediator evokes dispositions for reflection and self-directed learning on the part of the coachee.

Identity can be viewed as personal, social, or related to role. In this chapter, we explored the relationships among personal identity, beliefs and values, cognitive and affective abilities, behavior, and environment. Identity is inseparable from our beliefs and values; capabilities are inextricably interrelated with behaviors; behaviors are the instruments with which we live out our identity, beliefs, and values; and the environment provides a context for all of this, often modifying their expressions. One can change the environment to make it more receptive to reflection and self-directedness. Garmston explores this in chapter 15 and in the Adaptive Schools book with Bruce Wellman (Garmston and Wellman 2013). Our identity evolves through the meanings we make from a history of reciprocal interactions and experiences. In a similar manner, our words and labels allow us to see new realities, and new realities affect our words. Our identity defines our reality, and our subjective reality helps to shape our identity.

Cognitive Coaching is not an algorithm to be rigorously applied as if it were a rote process because each person and situation is unique. Instead, Cognitive Coaching incorporates a set of values, beliefs, capabilities, mental maps, skills, and commitments dedicated to the goal of fostering self-directed learning in others. As these are practiced, tested over time, and assimilated into a person's day-to-day interactions, they become part of a Cognitive Coach's identity; ultimately, that identity becomes an

outlook on life. A Cognitive Coach's identity drives him/her to be committed to learning, to continually resist complacency, and to share both the humility and the pride of admitting that there is more to learn. Cognitive Coaches dedicate themselves to serving others, and they set aside their egos, devoting their energies to enhancing others' resourcefulness. They commit their time and energies to making a difference by enhancing interdependence, illuminating situations from varied perspectives, and striving to bring consciousness to intentions, thoughts, feelings, and behaviors and their effect on others and the environment.

A new identity may not be something that we build but rather something to which we evolve. In the same manner that Michelangelo carved his sculptures by chipping away the excess stone to reveal the figure that was already inside the marble, our identity may go through a gradual 'morphing' process to form new dimensions of itself. Through Cognitive Coaching, we have seen these transformations countless times as people 'discover' powers they have through the processes of mediation. Mediating thinking allows what may lie in the subconscious to rise to consciousness. Identity without distinctiveness is imitation.

It is no less important to recognize and promote individual identity-hence creating and reinforcing what we have labeled individuation and psychological differentiation . Although the fusion that needs to occur through the mediation of sharing behavior is important, there is also the 'companion' need for individuation, to value one's uniqueness. The individual has to be given the opportunity to learn that whatever is done, the way it is done, the way one thinks or expresses oneself, is absolutely acceptable and appropriate (when it is in fact so). This does not offer a major contradiction with what we said above-rather, it is the other side of the same 'coin.' We want the individual to feel they don't have to mirror the other: 'You are you and I am me' (Feurerstein, Falik, and Feurerstein 2014, 91).