## PARALANGUAGE

On average, adults find more meaning in nonverbal cues than in verbal ones. A recent summary of communication literature supports the theory that nearly two-thirds of meaning in any social situation is derived from nonverbal cues (Burgoon, Buller, and Woodall 1996). Receptivity and high expectations are communicated with initial direct eye contact, low breathing, and head nods. Matching voice tone and pace, using the other person's gestures as you speak, matching posture, gesture, breathing energy, and words all contribute to rapport (Zolller and Landry 2010). Silence accompanied with low breathing also fosters rapport (Poyatos 2002).

We use the word presence to express a state in which the coach devotes total attention to the other person. Presence is essential but not sufficient for effective conversations. In some remarkable research, it was found that where managers gave unflattering feedback to people while emitting warm feelings to them, the recipients of the feedback still had positive feelings about the interaction (Goleman 2006; Burgoon et al. 1996). In addition to posture, gesture, and use of space, the intonation, rhythms, pacing, and volume of a person's voice all contribute important information about the communication. This is true within all cultures. (Cultural differences will be explored in chapter 10.)

Vocal cues affect attention. In a classic book, top nonverbal-behavior scholars (Burgoon et al. 1996) report studies that demonstrate that 'vocal variety, which includes variation in pitch, tempo, intensity and tonal quality, has been shown to result in increased comprehension.' In classroom work, Michael Grinder (1991), observing more than 5,000 classrooms, found that teachers tend to use one of two voices that elicit student attention in order to achieve comprehension. One is a credible voice, with which the teacher gains attention and gives direction. This voice is characterized by a limited range of modulation and a tendency to go down in intonation at the end of a sentence. (Imagine a newscaster reporting news.) The second voice, and the one used in coaching, is an approachable voice. This has a wider range of modulation and a tendency, at times, to rise in inflection at the end of a sentence. When delivered in an approachable voice, questions like 'How did you decide to . . . ?' or

'What are your goals?' signal safety and inquiry. The same questions offered in the credible voice feel like interrogation and lead to shutdowns in thinking.