## Rapport

When entrainment (matching) of several of these processing and communication systems is present, people can be said to be in rapport. Amazingly, neuroscientists have found that conversations trigger physical and emotional changes in the brain, either opening you up for a trusting interchange or closing you down so that you speak from caution and worry (Glaser 2014). In rapport, brains actually synchronize, crossing the skull and skin barriers to beat as one. Brains thus loop outside our awareness (Stern 2004). It is said that in a conversation between Jonas Salk and Gregory Bateson, one said to the other, 'Where does thinking occur?' 'About here,' the other said, pointing to the space between them. However, intentionally mimicking someone to foster rapport can come off as awkward. Since mirror neurons transmit intentions consciously, matching with the intention to be fully present and available to the other person transcends the communication of awkwardness. Surely, this phenomenon is present in 'motherese,' the universal language of mothers in which high-pitched playful tones are emitted while mother and baby 'precisely time the beginning, end, and pauses in their baby talk creating a coupling of rhythm' (Goleman 2006, 36).

An example of entrainment in a school setting might be the following: Lee says, 'Fran, I've got some teachers on my staff doing things I am really excited about. I'm trying to figure out how I can get them to share some of their good ideas with other faculty.' While Lee is speaking, she gestures broadly with her hands and arms. Then she shrugs her shoulders as she notes her predicament. Now Fran says, 'Lee, tell me a little bit about what's so special about these teachers.' As Fran speaks, she mirrors Lee's gestures and body movements.

Because Lee's nonverbal behaviors are congruent with her feelings and thoughts, each particular movement and gesture conveys specific

meanings. When Fran borrows these same nonverbal cues, Lee subconsciously senses that Fran knows exactly what she's talking about.

At this point you may wish to see these nonverbal responses in action. Please go to www.thinkingcollaborative.com/supporting-audio-videos 3-1.1, 3-1.2, and 3-1.3. There are two segments in which Jane and Monica demonstrate rapport. Observe the matching of their body posture. In the second video, notice the mirror movement of the coach's head in response to Monica's. In the third segment with Carolee as coach, notice the body configurations matching in more casual postures.